Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (05:20) Thank you very much Doctor Bloomfield. Can I reiterate your thanks to those who are our midwives in our communities and it is in times like this that we acknowledge the role that they play for many mums-to-be within the community and within the [Efano 00:05:38] and they always go above and beyond. I just want to acknowledge that and also of course World Hand Washing Day as well.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (05:45) Achieving zero cases two days in a row is the result of New Zealand is demonstrating our level of commitment and discipline to our goal of winning the fight against COVID-19, that we can all be undeniably proud of. It points to a lockdown doing exactly what we’d planned it to do, break the chain of transmission.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (06:07) However, we know the virus can have a long tail and the other cases can pop up. So as we make our way through this week and head towards the level three review next week, my message remains. Don’t do anything that snatches our potential victory at this point.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (06:28) One case at one gathering has led to multiple clusters and the virus getting away on us can still happen. So my message remains the same for the remainder of the week. Stay home, stay in your bubble, maintain physical distancing and let’s double down this week to maintain this a good run of numbers.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (06:49) I’m also mindful that I have seen positive numbers and other places before and it’s not always sustained so we do need to still be cautious. Before I come to Australia, I want to give you a quick update on the progress of the support and assistance for businesses and the workers hit by COVID-19.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (07:07) This afternoon, the COVID-19 Response fear the measurement measures [inaudible 00:07:11] but have its first reading in parliament. It gives a range of measures the government has put in place to support businesses through the pandemic, including helping businesses facing insolvency to remain viable by hibernating existing debt until they can trade normally again.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (07:27) Changes to the parental leave scheme to allow essential workers to return to work without being disadvantaged, by losing entitlements to a certain leave and payments. And changes that will allow the likes of the Heart Foundation and Coast Guard and particularly Countdown Kids Charitable Trust, to process their fundraising lotteries through email, phone, and electronic payments. These are just some of the innovative consequences of this extraordinary time we’re in and the resolution that we’re finding for those problems.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (07:58) First reading of the bill will take place this afternoon and we’ll be referred to the Epidemic Response Committee for consideration and reported back to the House on Tuesday 12 May. It will then move through the remaining sort of stages as quickly as possible.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (08:13) I’ve just come from a meeting of the Australian National Cabinet, a gathering of Australia, state and federal leaders, to discuss our experience with COVID-19 on both sides of the ditch, what we can learn from one another and how we might be able to work together as we recover from this pandemic.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (08:32) The National Cabinet tends to meet in times of national crisis, but obviously is infrequent. The last New Zealand prime minister participate in such a meeting was Peter Fraser who attended various meetings of Australia’s a wall cabinet.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (08:45) Australians and New Zealanders has traveled across the ditch more than they do anywhere else. New Zealand is Australia’s second largest source of tourists after China with 1.2 million visitors last year and 1.6 million Aussies visited us. So we both stand to benefit from getting travel up and running again.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (09:04) Part of the reason for so much trouble is it families and friendships of course span the Tasman; around 75,000 Australians and New Zealand and more than half a million Kiwis in Australia. We’re also Australia’s largest export market by number of exporting firms, 18 and a half Aussie businesses trade with New Zealand, meaning we’re especially critical for Australian [inaudible 00:09:26]. So the case for increasing economic relations when safe is clear.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (09:32) I joined the meeting at the very, very beginning and I should note it is still underway and so you’ll forgive me for not saying too much here at this point but it is our intention to issue a statement at the conclusion of the National Cabinet in order to provide you all with an update of some of the issues discussed and some of the potential outcomes of that meeting.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (09:55) But again, I would note, such a discussion has only been possible as a result of the world leading results on both sides of the Tasman, then to get the virus under control and I do think that we should both be proud of the efforts that had been made and also again, the demonstration of the important Anzac bond between us.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (10:14) On to a bit of Kiwi ingenuity. I’ve outlined a few innovations today that are helping to get our economy moving. I want to reflect on one of those in particular and that is our vital supply chain, our transport sector. New ways of working have ensured our food and goods have been unpacked from ships and aircraft, loaded into trucks and delivered to retailers, as well as kept our exports flowing.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (10:37) At Wellington Centrepoint, the teams eliminated face-to-face contact and physical paperwork and they’ve adopted digital kiosks, radio comms, automated way bridges and virtual planning meetings. We’ve seen that same kind of adaptability in businesses up and down the country.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (10:52) Just one example is how to particular drivers, Greg and Sam have willingly changed their hours of work and routines to match the different Interislander ferry timetables so they can continue to get frozen vegetables and chips from Ashburton to the ferries and pectin.Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern: (11:08) I want to say thanks to Greg and Sam. Necessity breeds innovation and with social distancing and good hygiene, likely of course to be with us for a long time to come, I wouldn’t be surprised if we keep seeing innovation throughout our alert levels and across the country.Jacinda Ardern: (00:29) Good afternoon. Welcome to day two of alert level three. It may surprise some viewers today to see me here alongside Dr. Bloomfield because you will have heard me say that recently was a sit down to be our last for the foreseeable future press conference together. But you will also have heard me repeatedly say that life at level three is very similar to life at level four, and so we decided to extend that mentoring to the way that we’re treating it with our press conferences. So after some feedback, you will find us here together until the remainder of level three concludes for the most part with ongoing appearances from other ministers and other agencies as part of the response to COVID-19. I’ll hand over though now for the health update from Dr. Bloomfield.Jacinda Ardern: (05:06) Thank you Dr. Bloomfield. I want to start by reminding people in the same way that Dr. Bloomfield has that we are not out of the woods yet. While our case numbers remain low, we will still have cases and we have seen with our large clusters in New Zealand that it only takes one person to potentially affect many. With that in mind, we continue to take a firm stance with the enforcement of rules at level three. This is our waiting room, and so we need to make sure that we’re vigilant in the way that we treat it. The rules are ultimately in place for a reason and that reason is to keep us safe, but to also move us as quickly as we can into other alert levels. Police recorded 104 breaches in the first 18 hours of alert level three. The vast majority of these resulted in warnings, but 21 people have been prosecuted and 71 warnings issued. In addition, 742 complaints of businesses not complying with level three rules were made. Most related though, interestingly, most related to a lack of social distancing and business operating practices. NB, NPI and other agencies will be following up on a further proportion of these complaints. Agencies have been tasked. In particular cases, with have triaged. 61 cases in particular are being followed up on. So our preference is to educate and engage with businesses to ensure they’re operating within the rules. We will not hesitate to take firmer measures if required. I asked a couple of questions this morning, particularly of some of the images I’ve seen of areas, and there were a couple of persistent photos that lingered around from some places in particular. And I’d been told that NB and health have actively reached out to some of those businesses to make sure that they are working with them on the ground to improve their practices to stop congregation at their place of business.Jacinda Ardern: (07:11) I wanted to update you today on early figures we have to hand on school and ECE attendance on the first day back today. Data from 10:30 AM this morning shows there are 7,713 children attending an early learning service and 11,846 attending a school. This represents 4% attendance at ECE and 1% attendance in schools. Keeping in mind though, for those numbers we’ve had reporting from 37% of early learning services and 55% of schools, so these numbers will be updated. But early indications are that New Zealanders continue to take our lock down at level three very seriously, that there remains an ongoing commitment to cementing what we’ve done and therefore learning and working from home if that’s possible. I do want to thank everyone who is doing that though. I know distance learning and having children at home while you’re working can be very hard, but these early numbers demonstrate the ongoing commitment people are showing and New Zealand’s ongoing commitment to not seeing a second wave of infection in New Zealand.Jacinda Ardern: (08:23) Finally, I want to talk about New Zealand small businesses, many of whom will now be back at work, but some who will not. We have already put in place the wage subsidy scheme to help with what is usually a firm’s largest costs, wages. And today I can share news of further work that we are doing to help with commercial rents. As many of you will know, we’ve already agreed to push out deadlines on lease terminations when someone moves into arrears, but it is clear that this alone would not be enough for many businesses. We need to provide more reassurance, as much as we’re able to within the law. Although we cannot currently impose a commercial rent reduction, you’ve heard me speak to that a few times here, we have asked commercial tenants and landlords to work together to reach a fair agreement. However, some parties on both sides of the contract appear unwilling to renegotiate payment terms with officials advising that some landlords are demanding full rent from tenants who have been unable to trade for several weeks and cannot afford it.Jacinda Ardern: (09:28) While resource tenants have written to landlords declaring that they refuse to pay any rent for several months. Minister Little discussed options with other ministers at cabinet committee this morning. I can confirm that we are actively working on measures under which parties to a commercial lease would be expected to consider written concessions in whole or in part for a period where a response to COVID-19 has had a material impact on business. We’ve heard the call for extra support from small business over and above that already provided through the wage subsidy and tax measures, and we are working actively to resolve that. So in principle, we’ve supported the work Minister Little is doing, we expect papers to come shortly, and as soon as those final decisions and work has been completed by the ministry of justice, we’ll be sharing it. I do want to acknowledge that something similar has been worked up in Australia.Jacinda Ardern: (10:21) That code of conduct designed to stand still hasn’t been legislated. That needs to happen at a state level. So we’re working actively on some or looking at some of the similarities of what they’ve done here and what will be workable under our property act in New Zealand. Finally, it was my privilege during alert level four lockdown to thank all of our essential workers and others who have done an amazing job. And now at alert level three, I’m receiving many, many examples of businesses using good old Kiwi ingenuity to open up at level three with contactless transactions. Today I want to highlight a couple of examples from what I know will be the missed food and beverage sector. [inaudible 00:11:03] local and events website-Jacinda Ardern: (11:03) The missed food and beverage sector. Gizzy Local, an events website, has collated in one place nearly 30 food businesses that Gisborne locals can now access, noting how to order and how to collect. And some of you will have seen coverage of the Auckland Coffee Shop extending a plank of wood from which to serve up their flat whites at inappropriate distance. I do want to say good on to everyone who is working so hard to innovate, keep their customers safe, but get also their staff back to work. It’s incredible to see. I know it makes people feel very proud, given the difficult circumstances people are operating under.Jacinda Ardern: (11:34) Okay. We’re happy to take your questions.Jacinda Ardern: (11:34) Desmond?Jacinda Ardern: (11:44) Yes, you will have heard the deputy prime minister point out that Health did suggest closing our borders entirely. Now you remember, we did close them off to foreign nationals. But we did not consider that it would ever be okay to stop New Zealanders coming home. You’ll struggle to find countries in the world that would make a move like that. But we simply would not tolerate New Zealanders not having the option to return to the safety of New Zealand, their home.Jacinda Ardern: (13:11) I think it’s totally understandable, under the circumstances, the Ministry of Health taking that position. Of course, the Ministry of Health wasn’t required to weigh up our obligations, through law, to our own citizens. We did have to weigh that up. The way that we could deal with both obligations was actually to set up the kind of quarantine that we have now at the border, which is working well.Jacinda Ardern: (13:32) Yeah?Jacinda Ardern: (14:38) Yeah. I do just want to reinforce that you’ll be hard pressed to find many countries in the world who took an extraordinary stance to exclude their own citizens from returning back to the one place they have a legal right to be. And it would have been extraordinary for the government to make a decision to strand New Zealanders and give them no ability to be able to come home. It could have meant that they were stuck illegally in other places, and it could have meant they could be stuck unsafely in other places, and we just couldn’t entertain that. Equally, we needed to keep New Zealanders safe when they did return.Jacinda Ardern: (15:12) Yeah, Gina?Jacinda Ardern: (15:18) Oh look, it was never entertained, in the same way that almost no country in the world has entertained not allowing citizens to come home. It is an extraordinary thing to deem someone stateless. But if you tell someone that they cannot return home, that’s essentially what you’re doing. And so there are international obligations that we have to consider with extraordinary decisions like that.Jacinda Ardern: (15:38) Gina, I’ll let you finished your question.Jacinda Ardern: (15:43) They don’t have to consider those kinds of things.Jacinda Ardern: (16:17) Look, it’s not at all unusual. Ministries focus on their own obligations and their own focus. And it wouldn’t have been normal for a public health response to factor in the kinds of things that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs [crosstalk 00:16:32]-Jacinda Ardern: (16:31) [inaudible 00:05:33].Jacinda Ardern: (16:40) We always make sure that within every decision that we make, we do have human rights considerations. That’s explicit in every paper we consider. It does not have to be generated by the Ministry of Health though. It is always a consideration though.Jacinda Ardern: (16:55) I’ll come to the front, and then I’ll come back to you.Jacinda Ardern: (17:27) Right here. I’ll keep [inaudible 00:06:25].Jacinda Ardern: (17:36) No. Actually the minister of health, or indeed any minister, doesn’t necessarily vet and curtail the advice of the Ministry that’s made available to us. In the same way that the minister of finance won’t always agree with Treasury’s view, that’s still able to be put to us for full consideration. So they don’t filter the advice that comes through. So we were able to see what the view of the Ministry of Health was, and then it’s our job to weigh that up against all of the other legal considerations that we must have.Jacinda Ardern: (18:10) The periods of time have somewhat merged together for me. I can get you a date for that, but it was … My recollection? It was pre level four, is my recollection. And out of interest, we now have 3,241 in managed isolation or quarantine. And we’ve had, roughly, give or take, about 25 people who have tested positive for COVID whilst they’ve been in our quarantine or isolation facilities. So it is proving its worth in stopping the spread of COVID.Jacinda Ardern: (18:54) I believe I’ve seen the same; I’ve seen still images rather than a video, and that caused me enough concern. I saw multiple angles of it. So it caught the attention of members of the public, which tells me that by and large people absolutely know what we need to be doing at level three, but clearly that wasn’t happening in this scenario. We have had confirmation though from officials this morning that they had been directly in contact, I’m told, with the head office of that operation, in order to ensure they understand their obligations, and that they will manage their ongoing trade from here on. Because they certainly didn’t fulfill those obligations last night.Jacinda Ardern: (19:37) Yep. I’ll let you follow up.Jacinda Ardern: (19:41) So as I mentioned, we received a message several days ago now just suggesting that Her Majesty was eager to touch base and hear how New Zealand was doing under the circumstances of the global pandemic. And so while it’s not general practice to comment to any detailed degree on the conversation, what I came away with was a very genuine and strong sense that Her Majesty is really interested in how we’re doing, and was heartened to hear that we’re doing okay.Jacinda Ardern: (20:13) Yeah?Jacinda Ardern: (20:16) Oh, I’ve come to you twice. I meant to go to Henry.Jacinda Ardern: (20:31) We work on proactive release and so this is information that would have been public anyway, and will be.Jacinda Ardern: (20:35) Benedict?Jacinda Ardern: (20:47) Yeah, I don’t know. I’ve heard that this might be based on an actual case, so I’ll hand over to Dr. Bloomfield.Jacinda Ardern: (22:00) And this is incredibly difficult, no matter what way you look at it. But you also see that …Jacinda Ardern: (22:03) … difficult, no matter what way you look at it, but you also see that from the statistics we’ve provided, they’d all be at a small number. We’ve also seen COVID cases coming in from international travel. We have to make sure that in allowing and enabling people to see family members they’re desperate to see that we don’t have double tragedy.Jacinda Ardern: (23:33) I have asked for another paper to come back to cabinet. One of the things that we’ve been mindful is we’re trying to reach a point where actually we’re bringing back all those who are caught up in the circumstances of COVID-19 through no fault of their own. And we were getting to a point where there is more deliberate decision making because then people know they’re going to encounter these costs in particular. So we have asked officials to provide us extra advice so we can work through what a cost recovery regime will look like in the future.Jacinda Ardern: (24:24) You will have heard me say from this podium before that this has to be an opportunity for us to finally close the inequities that we have in New Zealand and that we’ve had for a persistent amount of time. Now, whether or not it’s the guidance that you see from the State Services Commission saying today to exercise wage restraint for those on higher incomes, but to consider the wage situation of those on lower incomes. Or whether it’s the work that we’re proactively doing to redeploy, to drive a high wage economy, to see that we don’t replace those industries that traditionally have had lower wages with more lower wages. This is an opportunity and we need to use it.Jacinda Ardern: (25:13) Our goal as a government has always been to reduce inequalities. That is now a focus now more than ever. [inaudible 00:25:19]Jacinda Ardern: (25:39) No, I was aware that the minister before lockdown had moved home before lockdown. This was something that he completed a sale before even New Zealand even had a COVID case.Jacinda Ardern: (26:05) My message is very, very simple. I will not hesitate to act when it comes to a minister who I believe warrants my action against them. And you’ve already seen that. In this case, I do not believe that is the case based on what I have been advised.Jacinda Ardern: (26:30) Again, and that’s not how I would characterize things. For me, I’m very clear. You have already seen that if I believe it’s warranted for a minister to be severely reprimanded, for demotion to occur, I will not hesitate on that. But based on the information I’ve received, I do not believe that is warranted in this case. [crosstalk 00:26:48] the back.Jacinda Ardern: (26:51) Again, I’ve already shared with you my exact principle in dealing with these kinds of situations. You’ll have already seen, I won’t hesitate to act if that is what is required, but based on the information I have, that is not what is required here. There in the back.Jacinda Ardern: (27:20) Yeah, so two comments I would make. Firstly, it is very difficult for the world to have actually been well prepared for what has become a one in 100 year global pandemic. And I think you’ll see to varying degrees that has been manifest for all of us. But when it comes to actually public health, I would agree that we do need to rebuild our health system, in particular the investment in public health. That is something that I would have said even beforeCOVID-19 and was part of this government’s agenda. But what we’re seeing is some specific elements of public health that did need that extra investment and modernization. Previously there probably hasn’t been the reason for PHUs who have operated separately to necessarily have the national footing that we now see as so, so necessary, dealing with TB, dealing with rheumatic fever. We may well have had that advice post measles, but we’re still in the aftermath of working through that to have made that determination. But the fact we’ve managed to change our footing within a month, I think demonstrates that we can be agile. [crosstalk 00:28:24] Yes, Jason.Jacinda Ardern: (28:39) Jason, you’ll find that I usually say that when you’re fishing.Jacinda Ardern: (29:18) [crosstalk 00:29:18] Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (30:08) It tells us so there’s a long tail to COVID though when you have that length of time and still someone testing positive.Jacinda Ardern: (31:45) We can probably bring you an update tomorrow as well. Yeah, [crosstalk 00:31:48]Jacinda Ardern: (32:00) Yeah. I take your point. I mean we haven’t put out that same level of specificity, but it’s fair to say the guidelines that we put out at level four around limiting people’s movements, limiting being out and about limiting being in the supermarket, they all still apply and so again, we just want people to stick to those same principles now, even though you have the joy of being able to queue, which has obviously become a social activity for some bubbles. Yeah, [crosstalk 00:32:24]Jacinda Ardern: (33:13) As is the testing protocols for asymptomatic testing of close context when someone is an essential worker in a place where there’s high contact with people. So asymptomatic testing is happening under those scenarios.Jacinda Ardern: (33:34) So, we have said that we do want to cover off legitimate costs for health practitioners for COVID-19, and we’re still in the process of working through what the detail of some of that would imply, and that includes for maternity services. I haven’t got a timeline for you, but I think it’s under active consideration by the Ministry of Health at the moment. [crosstalk 00:33:51].Jacinda Ardern: (33:59) He remains as our Health Minister. I know I’ve had those ongoing questions from time to time, but I can tell you that you can put a hypothetical and have any minister’s name in there around the ongoing future, and my answer to this will be a that until I say otherwise, people are in their jobs, but I expect everyone to maintain standards throughout their role as ministers, and I give no minister guarantees about anyone’s future because we all have to maintain standards all the way through our practice in these roles. [crosstalk 00:34:26]Jacinda Ardern: (34:49) Yeah, I don’t think, Oh, sorry. You didn’t mean that for me.Jacinda Ardern: (34:55) How about I have a go first?Jacinda Ardern: (34:58) Well, first thing I would say is that I wouldn’t have called it simply a high trust model. There were checks in place. We did have the police involved. We had Healthline involved. But it became very clear to us that not only did we need a more rigorous approach, we needed to stop household transmission. So at a point where we were able to manage a system where everyone was quarantined, keeping in mind we had tens of thousands of people returning in those early days, we moved to that. On the question of timeliness, New Zealand 20 days after our first class closed our borders to foreign travelers, now that made us amongst the first in the world to have done that. And so I think that was a significant move by us and we did it very, very early on in our COVID journey. [crosstalk 00:35:45]Jacinda Ardern: (36:46) Sure, Derek, last one.Jacinda Ardern: (36:55) Capacity, we’ve talked about that.Jacinda Ardern: (37:07) Well, I would disagree with that, but…Jacinda Ardern: (37:31) I think that’s the best counter argument we could have is that if that’s his claim about where we stood, then how is it that we’ve managed to produce what we have?Jacinda Ardern: (37:42) Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (37:58) We’ve been having this discussion. Of course there is a threshold that needs to be met for someone to have been declared recovered. And the person that tested positive had not been declared recovered. But what we’re discussing now is just the length of time that COVID can take. And so we’ve had this discussion before, and I’ll hand over to Dr. Bloomfield on that, but this idea that you can have COVID for a long period of time, and that it can have not necessarily be gone and come back, but actually just persist with you for quite some period. So we’ve been talking about what the work the technical advisory group can do to help us get reassurance that people who’ve recovered genuinely have.Jacinda Ardern: (39:20) [crosstalk 00:39:20] I’ll finish up with Ben.Jacinda Ardern: (39:31) Two quick clarifications. I don’t think I’m ever [inaudible 00:00:39:37], but two clarifications. The first is that it wasn’t a Cabinet disagreement. It was advice from a department that as a whole Cabinet did not share that view and that is not unusual. You’ll often receive Cabinet papers that will hold a view that is not overall supported by the entire paper it even sits within. So it wasn’t a Cabinet disagreement as we would frame it. Cabinet disagreement is when we can’t form consensus as a group of ministers.Jacinda Ardern: (40:05) The second point that I would make is I frequently come down and share views and decisions that are made, and we release Cabinet papers proactively that then demonstrate where a department takes a view counter to a decision we’ve made. So it’s not at all unusual for that to have been done. And that’s what the Deputy Prime Minister has done today, and he did it with my full knowledge, so I see nothing unusual about that at all. Okay. [crosstalk 00:40:30] Very, very last one. Jenna, I’ll give it to you.Jacinda Ardern: (40:44) All the way through we’ve been concerned about mental health. Right before even making a decision about lockdown, this was something we were concerned about. We’ve invested heavily in mental health responses, whether or not it’s access to 1737, the mental health telehealth service, or actively promoting and supporting apps that people have been able to access from home, that has been a strong part of our in-isolation response to mental health. We also know one of the best things we can do is try and get back to normality as soon as we can safely. Okay, thanks everyone.Jacinda Ardern: (00:22) Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to day 13 of our COVID alert level four lockdown and update. We’ll start with the update today from the director general of health, and then I will come back for some opening remarks. You’ll note that we have moved to a combined press conference set simply as we transition from really the early stages of alert level four and as we see some of those operational updates lessen a little bit. We will still be making sure that we have different operational leads who are available. For instance, the commissioner of police and so on, just to pick up any questions across those areas. In recognition though of a combined press conference, I will make sure that we linger longer in order to pick up any questions that you might have. But director general, we’ll start with you.Jacinda Ardern: (04:57) Thank you, Ashley. To begin with, today, I wish to speak about the actions of the Minister of Health. As you all have heard, last night David Clark advised me that he drove his family to the beach for a walk in the early stages of the lockdown. He also offered me his resignation. I want to share with you what I shared with him. Under normal circumstances, I would sack the minister. What he did was wrong and there are no excuses, but my priority above all else is our collective fight against COVID-19. That requires leadership amongst our DHBs. It requires a good understanding of workforce issues. It requires an intimate knowledge of the strengths and weaknesses of our health system, which we have been working so hard to rebuild. And, of course, it requires knowledge of the complex nature of this global pandemic and what it means here in New Zealand.Jacinda Ardern: (05:58) Simply put, I determined that we cannot afford massive disruption in the health sector or to our response, because David Clark continues to possess what we require as our health minister to take on COVID-19. For that reason and that reason alone, Dr. Clark will maintain his role, but he broke the rules and he does need to pay a price. So, while he maintains his health portfolio, I have stripped him of his role as associate finance minister and demoted him to the bottom of our cabinet rankings. His associate finance minister delegations revert to the minister of finance, with the exception of where they relate to budget oversight of Minister Robertson’s other portfolios. They will go to Minister Parker. These changes are effective immediately. David Clark is under no illusions that I expect better, and so does New Zealand.Jacinda Ardern: (06:55) Onto COVID-19 related matters, I can also report that we do, as the director general of health says, continue to ramp up our testing capacity. We are testing more and more people, and the growth in the number of new cases remains relatively consistent. While I still urge caution, this does suggest that what we are doing as a nation is working. This was echoed earlier today on Nine to Noon by John McDermott, who leads a team of data scientists that I referenced on Sunday. He said over the next day or so, we could continue to see the impacts of alert level four. He says, ” When numbers start to fall, that is the first indication your interventions working.”Jacinda Ardern: (07:35) John explains we need to go through three phases. You start with outbreak, then secondly you want linear, which we have seen over the past few days. Thirdly is the phase where you see cases start to fall. He is cautiously optimistic that what we’re doing with the lockdown is making a difference, but as with any data analysis, there are always possibilities of setbacks. But, for the moment, we do appear at this early stage to be on track, another reason, if one was needed, of the need to stay at home. Now is not the time to change any of our behaviors. Now, that doesn’t make the physical isolation any easier, so I also note today that we have announced a range of support being rolled out to help look after people, look after their mental health as we fight COVID-19. Details of Tangata Pacific communities’ health response to the virus has also been released.Jacinda Ardern: (08:33) I can also share that as of last night, the government’s wage subsidy scheme has provided support to preserve the jobs of over one million New Zealanders. The latest numbers show over 435,000 applications have been made, almost 10,000 yesterday alone, and that has seen over 6.6 billion paid out to help retain 1,073, 120 workers. Finally, the foreign minister has just announced that New Zealand will enter into transit arrangements with a range of countries to make it easier for each other’s citizens to get home. As you know, a major barrier to New Zealand is getting back here at the moment, as the transit restrictions imposed by many other countries. We, in tune, are also receiving an increasing number of requests from foreign governments to allow their nationals to transit through Auckland. I note that while this is a welcome development and regardless of the countries involved, we will maintain strict criteria in determining the basis on which people can transit through New Zealand in order to protect public health and meet our level four requirements. That includes that any transiting passengers absolutely remain Airside.Jacinda Ardern: (09:51) Lastly, I do want to acknowledge the news this morning that Prime Minister Boris Johnson is currently in intensive care. Upon learning, the prime minister had tested positive for COVID-19 some days ago now, I sent a message to him to pass on New Zealand’s best wishes. He replied to that message and said that his thoughts were also, “with all our friends in New Zealand.” This more than ever is a time when every nation is connected, and I know we want everyone in the UK, especially the prime minister, to know that we are thinking of them. Now, I’m happy to take your questions.Jacinda Ardern: (10:30) He has made a massive mistake. What he did was wrong and there are no excuses for it, but I need to make decisions now in the best interest of New Zealand. Disrupting our current plans to take on this global pandemic by removing the minister of health, in my mind, was not in the best interest of New Zealand.Jacinda Ardern: (10:55) None of that matters. I wasn’t interested in excuses. He wasn’t interested particularly in offering them. He’s made a mistake. He needs to pay the price, and he is.Jacinda Ardern: (11:11) That is not the case. That is not the case. It was offered up over the course of him preparing for select committee this morning. But regardless of how it came up, regardless, there is no excuse. It was wrong. He needs to pay the price, but the price cannot be paid through our response to this global pandemic. We have a job to do, and I’m determined that we need to get on with it.Jacinda Ardern: (11:42) Yeah. By acknowledging that he was wrong, by acknowledging that under different circumstances he would have lost his job, but he knows as well as I do that we have to put New Zealand first, and we have to put the response to this global pandemic first. Nothing else matters right now.Jacinda Ardern: (12:03) At the moment, our entire focus is on this pandemic, and we will have this with us for many, many months to come. I’m focused on getting on with it now, and he needs to to.Jacinda Ardern: (12:15) I’ll come back to you.Jacinda Ardern: (12:22) He’s had to pay a personal price for this, but I’m determined that our health system will not.Jacinda Ardern: (12:48) This is why you will hear no defense, no excuse. He made a mistake. He must pay the price, but the price cannot be in our response to COVID-19. I have a duty of care to New Zealand, and it was my determination that removing him from …Jacinda Ardern: (13:03) … off Kia to New Zealand, and it was my determination that removing him from this role at this time would not be in the best interest of that response that we must focus on.Jacinda Ardern: (13:12) Again, I am totally focused on this and not on hypotheticals. We need to get on with the job.Jacinda Ardern: (13:22) Again, as I say, my focus is on responding to pandemic and I’ve set out a number of different areas where it is critical that we have deep prior knowledge, the role that he must play within DHBs, the personalities he needs to know and understand across our health system, and the deficiencies that already exist in our health system we were well aware of and need to fix. I cannot lose the work that’s been done nor the prior knowledge of the health system in this pandemic. He holds that so we will hold onto that, but he must pay a price.Jacinda Ardern: (14:00) Yes.Jacinda Ardern: (14:05) Yes, it would have been challenging. And keeping in mind that it’s not just of course the knowledge of this pandemic itself and its impact on New Zealand, but also the prior knowledge of our health system and where there are issues within our health system. I was not willing to sacrifice the time that would be required to bring someone up to speed when we are in the middle of a global pandemic. That would not have been the right decision for New Zealand.Jacinda Ardern: (14:47) No, I have expressed of course through all of the details I’ve outlined to you about the prior knowledge required to do this job well, the standing that was currently required within his knowledge of the health system, I needed someone who has that to continue in this job, not someone to start fresh. Not we’re in the middle of a global crisis. I’ve determined that this is the right thing to do, but he still must pay a price.Jacinda Ardern: (15:24) Oh look, I haven’t seen every single, I’ve seen the outline of the slit committee today, so I can’t respond to individual questions around detail that he may have determined to be operational. That’s not unfair.Jacinda Ardern: (15:41) Again, I said right from the beginning, my expectation was that ministers fulfill the obligations we are expecting of every other New Zealander, and that is why I am here now reprimanding him, steeping him down from other portfolios and sliding him down the cabinet rankings. He must be a role model, but equally I will not sacrifice our response to COVID-19. That has to be my absolute focus.Jacinda Ardern: (16:12) Well, I of course have a role to play here, but I also have a role to play in supporting the minister of finance in the economic response, the welfare and wellbeing response, even some of the recovery packages that are specific to my areas too. My job is to continue to keep our all of government response going. I’d need that additional focus on our health response, and the minister of health provides that.Jacinda Ardern: (16:41) I’ve reminded them. I’ve reminded both our ministers and every member of my caucus, and I think it’s obvious what our expectations are. I’ve been up here repeating them daily. I don’t think that’s been lost on anyone. It is certainly not lost on the minister of health.Jacinda Ardern: (17:12) Yes, there was some discussion of that. I’m not expecting final advice and recommendations in the next… I’m expecting them very shortly. There was a preliminary discussion though around our expectations and giving a steer to officials.Jacinda Ardern: (17:31) Well I think you’ve seen from every decision we’ve made at the border, that we see it as an ongoing point of risk. And so we want to make sure that we remove that risk as much as possible. That’s why we’ve only continued to ramp up. So quite frankly, regardless of the enforcement, I really want a water tight system at our border and I think we can do better on that.Jacinda Ardern: (18:11) Yeah, I did see those comments and I think you’ve always would have heard me say, and perhaps the director general have a comment on this too, that there are those three areas that we must be absolutely watertight on, border restrictions. We did move faster than many other countries and we have reaped the benefits of that. But border restrictions, the work on contact tracing and of course just general use of isolation and quarantining as a part of that. On border restrictions, I’ve already indicated that we will continue to ramp those up and we’ll be doing that shortly. On contact tracing, the director general’s talked about the extra support we’re putting in there, the fact we want that backed up by new technological solutions, and also many of you will have heard Dr. Ayesha Bureau speaking frequently about WHO knowledge there. The ministry of health is proactively bringing her in to undertake an audit of our contact tracing and give us that extra assurance that we are doing everything that we can do. Director general, is there anything you want to say in response to David Skeeks?Jacinda Ardern: (19:41) Again, I just want to point to the evidence base for that because that’s making the assumption that people who are in self isolation, which we’ve been using as a tool for the whole country, the whole country, we’ve used self isolation for. And for border controls, we’ve used it since February. And I haven’t seen today suggestions that those individuals have been broadly flouting it and infecting people. What we’ve done though is leave no room for human error and leave no room for individuals to flout that because we can’t risk it going forward. So that’s why we’ve continued to ramp up. We now have a situation where well over 1,000 people are in hotels monitored by the government and that will only set to increase.Jacinda Ardern: (20:30) So is alert level four. But we have continued to rely on people following the rules, and I haven’t seen suggestions that we have a broad wide ranging breach of that, but equally we don’t want to leave room for that. So that’s why we’ve continued to ramp up at the border.Jacinda Ardern: (20:52) So from the very early days where we were asked about it, quite frankly, scale. I don’t think there’s a full appreciation of how many New Zealanders travel abroad. We literally had tens of thousands returning to New Zealand. Now we had a process at the border to make sure that we were picking up symptomatic individuals, that we were giving the full requirements and expectations of them, that health line were checking. So we had measures in place, but you’ll see we’ve continued to stoop them up as we’ve had the capacity and as the numbers have dropped.Jacinda Ardern: (21:26) And as I’ve said, I’ve already flagged that we are looking again to leave no room for error at the border. And so I warn New Zealanders that you can expect at our borders, we will be expecting more of you.Jacinda Ardern: (21:45) That’s not an issue I’ve had raised with me. I wouldn’t mind just having a bit of time to look at that, if you wouldn’t mind.Jacinda Ardern: (21:57) Again, I wouldn’t mind seeing some of the detail on that, but I would apply the same principle for everyone here around providing compassion for those who need compassion at this time, and I would provide that view generally. No exceptions for the government on that.Jacinda Ardern: (22:23) Yeah, I think we do need to send a clear message as we come into Easter. The same rules apply. The whole notion of stay local applies. And so I know people will be very tempted over this period of time, that if they’re in a position where they have a home some distance from where they are, stay where you are. Just because it’s Easter does not mean that the rules of alert level four have changed. Director general, you might have more to say on that perhaps because it is some public messaging we’ve been trying to share.Jacinda Ardern: (23:10) Long staycation.Jacinda Ardern: (23:20) I’m going to allow the director general to answer that himself, but I’m going to jump in if we have too many political questions going to the-Jacinda Ardern: (23:45) Yes, so we do. Under certain circumstances there is provision for [inaudible 00:23:52] assistance. But that is under very particular circumstances. And they include, for instance, if someone has absolutely no financial ability to extract themselves from a country. Those are made all on a case by case basis by the ministry of foreign affairs and trade on the ground. So I don’t want to say that it’s a blanket provision, but it does exist for emergency situations. On the Peru repatriation flights, there is a charge that they are being treated, but it does not cover the full cost of getting these New Zealanders out. I should be very clear on that. We are underwriting the cost of getting them out. They are being charged for the tickets but not at the full rate of, not full cost recovery, and similar prices to what, for instance, people paid on the recent flight from Peru and Montevideo, so not too dissimilar to what Australia had under these circumstances.Jacinda Ardern: (24:48) No, I do not at this stage. No, but we can probably give it to you. I imagine that they must be fairly close to extracting them given that we have a level of detail now around the price and ticketing for it though.Jacinda Ardern: (26:26) I think it’s also worth noting that I think the last time we had positive cases at this level was roughly two weeks ago. So, that’s also interesting to know. Again, don’t wish to draw conclusions, but it is interesting to see the parallel. Jackson.Jacinda Ardern: (26:50) Yes.Jacinda Ardern: (26:59) Yeah. 286 from the 20 to 29 year olds. And the next highest is the 50 to 59. But, yeah. Dr. Bloomfield is absolutely right. The 20 to 49 group really do dominate.Jacinda Ardern: (27:53) Yeah. In the front.Jacinda Ardern: (28:52) Just to update you, at the moment, the numbers for Maori who are presenting with COVID-19 is 91. In the back.Jacinda Ardern: (29:08) Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (29:10) Yeah. And so, there were some very specific issues around Peru and the ability because of the nature of the lock down to keep them out. And I’ve seen some specific details on others. Obviously, I shared a little bit about Austria yesterday, but I can look into India. I don’t have that in front of me now. But I am aware that that’s one of the areas we’ve got affected New Zealanders too.Jacinda Ardern: (29:31) Otherwise, Fiji as well. We’ve got some in Tonga, a small number in Samar, around the worldJacinda Ardern: (29:38) Yes.Jacinda Ardern: (29:48) Yes. So, I might ask the Director General to supplement what I’m able to share. I’m familiar with some of their activity in Wellington. And I’m familiar with some of their activity in the Hawke’s Bay. And, of course, you’ll remember that the obligations on a cruise ship such as this is to ensure that anyone who is unwell essentially does not disembark. And so, I know specifically for the Hawke’s Bay, I’ve been advised that those assurances were directly sought from their medical officer of health, from the captain directly before individuals disembarked.Jacinda Ardern: (30:23) What I’ll add here is that, on that basis, given you’ll see we have cases in the Hawke’s Bay, I have asked minister Parker to seek legal advice from Crown Law as to whether or not the Ruby Princess, while in New Zealand, fulfilled all of its obligations under our laws. Because, of course, we are now suffering the consequences of cases here in New Zealand as a result of that cruise ship.Jacinda Ardern: (30:49) It’s really… I’m seeking legal advice on whether or not we should be pursuing that further. So, it’s very preliminary stages. But, of course, because they have existing obligations, because those obligations include making sure that people who are unwell essentially do not disembark, and we now have COVID-19 transmission that directly links back to that ship, not from passengers but from people who had contact with passengers, that raises significant questions. And so, I’ve sought legal advice around that. Do you have anything further on that?Jacinda Ardern: (31:36) So, they cut off, I think, the last two stops.Jacinda Ardern: (31:41) The claim there was that they would depart straight after the Hawke’s space. So, that lasts cheek did happen, as I understand, I’m advised that last cheek happened at Hawke’s Bay and then they left. Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (31:54) And every time, usually, I have that number straight in of me, but I haven’t brought it down with me today, Jason.Jacinda Ardern: (31:59) Oh, do you? Do you mind?Jacinda Ardern: (32:15) Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (32:31) Yes.Jacinda Ardern: (32:36) Yes.Jacinda Ardern: (32:39) Yeah. I mean, on the issue of the individual who went into hospital, from what I’ve seen of the case, it leaves a strong impression that, in order to excess surgery, that individual was not open about their health status. And that puts them at risk. And it puts the health staff who are there to look after them at risk too.Jacinda Ardern: (33:04) Now, I think this feels like an obvious statement to make, but if you have COVID symptoms, if you do not tell health professionals, even before you have contact with them, by picking up the phone you are putting their lives at risk. And we just can’t tolerate that regardless of how urgent someone considers their surgery to be. We cannot tolerate that. That, though, is an issue. And, as to any repercussions for that person, that’s not a matter for me. But my message on it is very clear.Jacinda Ardern: (33:36) Yeah. Yeah. Again, they should. Hunting was an area where I will acknowledge, in the early days, I did see some conflicting advice going out on hunting. So, I just see that issue there. But ultimately, that is for the police to follow up on their own team and making sure that they do fulfill the expectations that have been set out for elite level four. Yeah. Right to the back.Jacinda Ardern: (34:05) Yes.Jacinda Ardern: (34:07) Yep.Jacinda Ardern: (34:10) Every time you go outside, when you return, wash your hands. I cannot say that often enough. And I say that, if you go to the supermarket. Yes, the supermarkets have actually put in quite rigorous protocols that they’re using, trying to sterilize trolley handles, trying to make sure that they give people the ability to keep as sterile as possible while they’re there. But, if you go out, when you come home, wash your hands.Jacinda Ardern: (34:39) Well, even then, I mean, they’re not utilized by everyone. And I think we need to keep that in mind. We have thought about that though. It’s one of the reasons, obviously, in public transport now people aren’t having to have that interaction with the drivers for that very reason. But, regardless of where the contactless payment existed more widely, there will be still people who wouldn’t use it, who choose not to, and equally who still want and need to access personal, one-to-one bank services as well. So, we do need to remember that part of the community. Right here.Jacinda Ardern: (35:18) I’m sure you won’t though, Joe.Jacinda Ardern: (35:33) Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (35:44) And so, what I can share with you at the moment, we are going to, in the same way that you’ve seen the Unite COVID-19, we’ll be using similar ways to excess New Zealanders. So, a lot of use of our social media and online platforms to access New Zealanders and share a strong message around looking after the public, their mental health. So, there’ll be tips directing people to places where they can look for information on how to look after themselves.Jacinda Ardern: (36:11) It’s been rolled out now. But there is a specific set of information that is also being designed specifically for those, for instance, who have recently had a baby and may have specific needs at this time too. So, we are starting to segment that as well. Director-General, you might have something you want to add on that.Jacinda Ardern: (36:52) What I should add is that this has been designed by the Mental Health Foundation and the Canterbury DHB because of their expertise and having gone through the likes of the earthquake. It will be supported by mobile apps which also link people into telehealth services, which is obviously something we use now, 1737. We are monitoring the number of people who are referencing COVID-19 when they call in that number. And we can see that there had been periods of spikes, and then it’s come back a little bit in recent times.Jacinda Ardern: (37:22) One of the other specifics, part of this program though, is the use of Sparklers. Sparklers is a program that we supported in the budget. It specifically focuses on support and resilience of children who are undergoing periods of anxiety, and stress, and distress. And so, it is evidence based. And I really encourage parents to look out for the Getting Through Together Campaign, look out for the details that come out there. Do access the programs for kids because they’re really well thought through. Jenna. Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (38:00) Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (38:02) It is flies directly in the face of the advice that we’re giving. And I would just say to those who are in positions like that, that we are relying on everyone to role model the behavior we need right now. And we are all in this together. And I’m really asking, for those leaders within our sporting codes, to join us in this because we can’t do this alone. No one can be exempt.Jacinda Ardern: (38:28) Jessica.Jacinda Ardern: (38:36) Yep.Jacinda Ardern: (38:41) Yeah. So, you all have heard me reference a few times now that the access to whole food was something that from day one, when we made a decision around essential services just being supermarkets, that people could access whole food provision online because there are a number of places that already provided that. Where there has been some question mark is for those who only offered a retail-Jacinda Ardern: (39:03) Some question mark is for those who only offered a retail offering, then transitioning into online sales and establishing new ways of doing things. That did open up some risks because they wouldn’t have been established processes for those businesses. I expect to have that conversation with our ministers again tomorrow about that specific issue. But what I would say is that through all of this, our priority has been reducing contact with people as much as possible and it will continue to be our primary focus.Jacinda Ardern: (39:43) Do you mean primarily people on work Visas?Jacinda Ardern: (39:48) Yes.Jacinda Ardern: (39:56) Under the epidemic notices we’ve had the ability to make sure that people through no fault of their own were in a position where either their Visa status had expired but they had no ability to leave the country. We’ve made provision for that. On the issue though specifically people on work Visas who have lost their jobs, this is a discussion I’ve had with the minister of immigration. Because as you can imagine, that does happen from time to time even outside of this extraordinary period. We rely on people on work Visas as a part of a condition of their Visa having the ability to support themselves if they find themselves in that situation. They are tested to ensure as part of the conditions that they do have some resource. But we also recognize that these are particular times and so this is a bit of an ongoing discussion with ministers. Something that we have had raised with us and that we are looking at.Jacinda Ardern: (41:02) Yeah. We’re looking at the whole end but if we’ve got a situation where people here were previously able to work now cannot work and now cannot get home, that is of course a problem that we need to be involved and working through.Jacinda Ardern: (41:19) They do not have the same eligibility if they’re on a work Visa. Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (41:56) Yep.Jacinda Ardern: (42:15) I’d say that’s probably true. I’ll just take the last couple. If anyone’s got questions on behalf of others that they haven’t asked. Okay. [inaudible 00:03:24]. I’ll give you one more. Then Derek, just because you look so appalled, I’ll give you one. Yeah.Jacinda Ardern: (42:37) Look, if I could start, because you are one of them and so really we should be paying tribute to Dr. Bloomfield as much as we should everyone. I wonder sometimes whether we underestimate the importance of public health in our health workers until we either have to access our health services or a family member does or we’re in a global pandemic. It shouldn’t take that to remind us how important they are. But may we never forget how important they are. Derek.Jacinda Ardern: (43:06) Oh, sorry. Sorry. You may wish to…Jacinda Ardern: (45:11) So you’ve got-Jacinda Ardern: (45:21) Quietly confident and cautiously optimistic [crosstalk 00:00:45:23].Jacinda Ardern: (45:30) No, actually just as I was preparing to come down, I’ve sought some additional information and unfortunately at the moment what I’ve seen is more the reporting. But I will ask for an update from particularly obviously for the people of Vanuatu who we are primed and ready to assist as required, but also the New Zealanders who are there. [Joe 00:06:49]?Jacinda Ardern: (45:55) No, I have not. I’ve been focused as you can imagine on this particular period, alert level four. Really, I feel it’s too early for me to say what situation New Zealand will be in even a month’s time. So I will continue though to make sure though that we give plenty of consideration to that with a good lead time.Jacinda Ardern: (46:25) Yes we will and I don’t anticipate that being challenging because our defense force as a matter of course have to be ready and able to deploy within a very short period of time no matter what status New Zealand is in. That’s in case we have any natural disasters domestically or in case they’re called upon internationally or for even surveillance purposes within our waters. They’re always at the ready no matter what New Zealand situation. Last one, [Tover 00:46:53].Jacinda Ardern: (47:00) Yes, that it’s always been built into our scheme. I’d have to check what the status is of any investigations because we’ve always said this a statutory declaration. It is a high trust model, but we will be following up on ensuring that if there are any anomalies, if issues are raised by employees, that we have a team ready and available to investigate any misuse. I believe we’ve actually beefed up the enforcement team for that purpose as well.Jacinda Ardern: (47:41) Outside of bubbles because of course people who are within bubbles can, but it means people who haven’t been in contact with one another.Jacinda Ardern: (47:54) Yeah. This has been an area where there’s been utter consistency because as you can imagine being such a traumatic experience and time for people, we’ve provided advice on tangy cremation graveside burials and access to funeral directors. It’s all available on the COVID 19 website. One of the things that I would just, and this is devastating to have to point out, but one of the things you will have seen from some of our clusters is they’re a slice of New Zealand life. The weddings, the functions in our small towns, their conferences, their rugby teams, that any social occasion where people are coming together and unfortunately a high risk time is when people come together to grieve.Jacinda Ardern: (48:43) Because when you grieve, you reach out for personal contact. You reach out to one another. That’s what we do at weddings as well. We have an enormous cluster as a result of one of those. I’ve said many times before, I don’t want grief on grief. It’s one of the devastating byproducts of what we’re having to do. Okay. Last one. Yep.Jacinda Ardern: (49:08) Yeah. Yeah. Of course, you’ll know that there were questions asked and tests undertaken in Wellington and so yes, there would have been repercussions if there were positive tests there. Okay.Jacinda Ardern: (49:20) Sneaky last one.Jacinda Ardern: (49:29) I didn’t pass any judgment on it yesterday, and I won’t pass judgment on it today. Ultimately, we made the form for the [inaudible 00:49:35] committee available in such a way that every member could stay home in order to participate. But ultimately there’s an element there of personal choice of those employees as to how they wish to do that. Okay. Thanks everyone.Jacinda Ardern: (03:46) On to COVID-19 related matters, I can also report that we do, as the Director General of Health says, continue to ramp up our testing capacity. We are testing more and more people, and the growth in the number of new cases remains relatively consistent. While I still urge caution, this does suggest that what we are doing as a nation is working. This was echoed earlier today on Nine To Noon by John McDermott, who leads the team of data scientists that I referenced on Sunday. He said over the next day or so we could begin to continue to see the impacts of alert level four. He says, quote, “When numbers start to fall, that is the first indication to interventions working.” John explains we need to go through three phases. You start with the outbreak, then secondly you want linear, which we have seen over the past few days, and thirdly is the phase where you see cases start to fall.Jacinda Ardern: (04:38) He is cautiously optimistic that what we’re doing with the lockdown is making a difference, but as with any data analysis, there are always possibilities of setbacks, but for the moment, we do appear, at this early stage, to be on track. Another reason, if one was needed, of the need to stay at home. Now is not the time to change any of our behaviors. Now, that doesn’t make the physical isolation any easier, so I also note today that we have announced a range of support being rolled out to help look after people, look after their mental health as we fight COVID-19. Details of our Tangata Pacific community’s health response to the virus has also been released.Jacinda Ardern: (05:24) I can also share that as of last night, the government’s wage subsidy scheme has provided support to preserve the jobs of over one million New Zealanders. The latest numbers show that over 435,000 applications have been made, almost 10,000 yesterday alone, and that has seen over 6.6 billion paid out to help retain 1,073,120 workers.Jacinda Ardern: (05:52) Finally, the Foreign Minister has just announced that New Zealand will enter into transit arrangements with a range of countries to make it easier for each other’s citizens to get home. As you know, a major barrier to New Zealanders getting back here at the moment is the transit restrictions imposed by many other countries, and we in turn are also receiving an increasing number of requests from foreign governments to allow their nationals to transit through Auckland. I note that while this is a welcome development, and regardless of the countries involved, we will maintain strict criteria in determining the basis on which people can transit through New Zealand in order to protect public health and meet our level four requirements. That includes that any transiting passengers absolutely remain airside.Jacinda Ardern: (06:41) Lastly, I do want to acknowledge the news this morning that Prime Minister Boris Johnson is currently in intensive care. Upon learning the Prime Minister had tested positive for COVID-19 some days ago now, I sent a message to him to pass on New Zealand’s best wishes. He replied to that message and said that his thoughts were also, quote, “with all our friends in New Zealand.” This more than ever is a time when every nation is connected, and I know we want everyone in the UK, especially the Prime Minister, to know that we are thinking of them.