Donald Trump: (00:00) We’re here to provide an update on the unprecedented testing capacity developed by the United States, the most advanced and robust testing system anywhere in the world by far. This afternoon I’ll also announce new steps that we’re taking to make test even more widely available. To battle the virus, my administration marshaled every resource at our nation’s disposal, public, private, military, economic, scientific and industrial all at your disposal. We launched the largest manufacturing ramp up since the second world war, there has been nothing like it since. At the center of this industrial and scientific mobilization, was the development of our coronavirus testing capabilities. In the span of just a few short months, we’ve developed a testing capacity unmatched and unrivaled anywhere in the world, and it’s not even close. This is a core element of our plan to safely and gradually reopen America, and we’re opening and we’re starting and there’s enthusiasm like I haven’t seen in a long time. Every American should be proud of the amazing array of talent, skill and enterprise our nation has brought to this challenge. In three months, the FDA has authorized more than 92 different tests, and over 9 million have been performed here in the United States. Three weeks ago, we were conducting roughly 150,000 tests per day, now we’re doing approximately 300,000 tests per day, a 100% increase, and it will go up substantially from that number. This week the United States will pass 10 million tests conducted nearly double the number of any other country, we’re testing more people per capita than South Korea, the United Kingdom, France, Japan, Sweden, Finland and many other countries, and in some cases combined.Donald Trump: (01:50) On Friday, the FDA authorized coronavirus antigen test, an alternative testing technology that can be much more readily manufactured. Quidel Corporation, which makes this newly authorized point of care test estimates that it will be able to manufacture 150,000 tests per day, immediately increasing to 300,000 tests per day within just a few weeks. To further expand our nation’s testing capabilities, this afternoon I am announcing that my administration … and we’ve got this all approved, it’s all done, is sending $ 1 billion to America states, territories and tribes. So, this has all been approved, we’ve gotten it done completed, the money is going out. This major investment will ensure that America continues to conduct more tests than any country on earth by far. I said from the beginning that the federal government would back up the states and help them build their testing capability and capacities, and that’s exactly what’s happened.Donald Trump: (02:56) This partnership has truly flourished, we have really had a very good relationship with the states and the governors and other representatives within the states. A relationship I think I can honestly say has not been seen in this country for many, many years. The governors and us are working together very closely, not only in testing but on ventilators where we have a capacity that’s at this point virtually unlimited, and we’re sending ventilators, as you probably heard from other countries, we’re sending many, many thousands of ventilators to other countries because they’re in tremendous need. I think building up a lot of Goodwill, but much more importantly than that we’re saving a lot of lives. Most states are now doing a great job. My administration allocated 5,000 machines and 700 labs across all 50 states, and governors have learned how to maximize these testing resources.Donald Trump: (03:54) The federal government is also supporting states with vital supplies, quick approvals of new tests, and one on one coaching from the team here at the White House on how to increase capacity and increase it very quickly. In recent weeks, we’ve held multiple conference calls with every state, as well as with DC and Puerto Rico. We jointly developed testing projections and goals for each state for the month of may altogether, totalling 12.9 million tests, think of that 12.9 million tests. Today I’m announcing that my administration will provide the collection supplies to help states meet their targets and meet them rapidly. During the month of may, FEMA and HHS will be delivering 12.9 million swaps to states nationwide. We already have them, the delivery will be very quick. We’re prepared to provide millions of additional swabs if any state is on a pace to surpass its goal and their goals are very high. We’ve set them very high, we’ve told them to set them very high.Donald Trump: (04:56) My administration will also provide approximately 9 million transport media, which are used to transfer swabs to the lab processing, a complicated process, but we’ve made it simple. As a result of these actions, every single state will be able to test more people per capita in May alone than South Korea has tested in four months since the outbreak began. This major commitment is possible because of the massive mobilization of American industry, including Puritan Medical Products, U.S. Cotton, Abbott Labs, and Thermo Fisher. Some of these incredible companies produce rapidly for us, and their products are here with us this afternoon. These are all different products that were literally just developed, and if you can imagine that, and these are the best machines and the best equipment anywhere in the world and other countries are calling us and we’re trying to work as much as we can, not only on ventilators, but also with testing.Donald Trump: (05:56) My administration also continues our tireless effort to expand testing in the most underserved communities through our partnership with the private sector, leading pharmacies and retailers are now operating over 240 testing sites across the country, and that’s in addition to all of the other sites that we have working, 70% of these sites are located in communities with unique vulnerabilities. There will be more than 300 sites by the end of this week, and retailers are making plans to open up hundreds and hundreds more locations within the next 30 days. These additional sites are helping us ensure access to testing in every community. My administration is fighting relentlessly to protect all citizens of every color and creed from this terrible virus, the invisible enemy.Donald Trump: (06:46) In addition to vast amounts of testing supplies, my administration has partnered with the private sector to coordinate the delivery of more than 90,000,095 masks, and these are of the highest quality. Many are made right here in the United States, a capacity we didn’t have it all at the beginning. 126 million surgical masks, likewise many are made here, 9 million face shields, 21 million surgical gowns, 993 million gloves and 10,690 ventilators, we’re building thousands of ventilators and numerous plants all across our country, it’s incredible actually. This global pandemic has inflicted great pain and hardship on our people, it should have never been allowed to happen, it should have been stopped at the source. We mourn for every life the virus has claimed, and we share the grief of all of you who have lost a loved one, and that goes worldwide to many, many countries, 184 countries at least.Donald Trump: (07:52) Thanks to the courage of our citizens and our aggressive strategy, hundreds of thousands of lives have been saved, and we have saved. If you look at on a per 100,000 basis, we’re at the best part of the pack right on the bottom, Germany and us are leading the world. Germany and the United States are leading the world, lives saved per a hundred thousand. In every generation through every challenge and hardship and danger, America has risen to the task. We have met the moment and we have prevailed. Americans do whatever it takes to find solutions, pioneer breakthroughs and harness the energies we need to achieve a total victory. Day after day we’re making tremendous strides with the dedication of our doctors and nurses, these are incredible people, these are brave people, these are warriors.Donald Trump: (08:45) With the devotion of our manufacturing workers, food suppliers, and lab technicians, and with the profound patriotism of the American people, we will defeat this horrible enemy, we will revive our economy and we will transition into greatness. That’s a phrase you’re going to hear a lot because that’s what’s going to happen. We’re going into the third quarter and we’re going to do well. In the fourth quarter, we’re going to do very good, and next year, I think we’re going to have one of the best years we’ve ever had because there’s a tremendous pent-up demand. It’s a demand and I’m feeling it, I’ve felt things a lot over my life, and I’ve made a lot of good calls. It’s a demand like I don’t think I’ve ever seen. There’s a pent-up demand, there’s a spirit in this country like few have seen.Donald Trump: (09:34) I think you can say, and we’ve helped a lot of the countries, a lot, really a lot. There’s a tremendous spirit all over the world to beat this terrible, terrible thing. But we’re transitioning to greatness and the greatness is going to be on the fourth quarter, but it’s really going to be next year, and it’s going to be a year like we’ve never had before. I really believe that as good as we’ve done and we’ve done great, we had the best economy in the history of the world, not just here, but anywhere in the world, you can talk China, you can talk any other country, we had the best economy anywhere in the world. We were going for numbers where there was unemployment numbers, where we had our best numbers, employment also numbers, little different where we had our best numbers, almost 160 million people. All of that, we had the greatest stock market numbers ever. I think we had 142 days where we set records in a short period of time, 152 days, we set records in the stock market.Donald Trump: (10:38) We rebuilt our military, all built in the United States. All of our equipment built $1.5 trillion plus. On the Southern border, the wall is being built, it’s being built rapidly. Now you don’t hear the opponents talking too much about the border, they don’t like to talk about it because it seemed that we were right on a lot of things. One of the things we are right about, one of the many things was the border, we have a very powerful border now. We had one of the best weeks in the history of our border between the United States and Mexico, our Southern border. We had very few people coming in very, very few, almost record low numbers. The wall is being built, it’s up to 181 miles already.Donald Trump: (11:22) It’s being built, it’s being built rapidly. People don’t talk about it anymore because it’s very successful, and the area where the wall has built, that is a lot still, but we want to be up to 450 by very short period of time. Early next year, we should be up to 450 and very shortly after that over 500 miles to be completed, but it’s had a tremendous impact. But again, we’ve had the best numbers, the last thing we want now with this pandemic is for people to come across our Southern border. Again, we’re doing record numbers, meaning record low numbers. So I just want to thank everybody, and I want to introduce Admiral Giroir, if you could please come up and Brad, if you would, Brad Smith. They’re going to do a little explaining as to what we’ve done with regard to testing and how successful it’s been. Then we’ll take some questions after that. Thank you very much.Donald Trump: (23:08) Thank you very much, Brett. Maybe you’ll both stay there. Could be some questions. Okay. Please, John, go ahead.Donald Trump: (23:45) I don’t think the system broke down at all, and one person tested positive, surprisingly, because the previous day tested negative, and three people that were in contact, relative contact, who, I believe they’ve all tested totally negative, but they are going to, for a period of time, self isolate. So that’s not breaking down.Donald Trump: (24:04) It can happen. It’s the hidden enemy. Remember that. It’s the hidden enemy. So things happen, but the three tested negative. The one who tested positive will be fine. It will be absolutely fine. Yeah, John? Yes?Donald Trump: (24:23) Well, I think, we have a lot of people in the White House, and we had one, basically we had one person. So we had a lot of people that work here. This building is shocking if you looked at the numbers, and it’s also tremendous numbers of people coming in. Normally, you wouldn’t do that, but because we’re running a country, we want to keep our country running. So we have a lot of people coming in and out.Donald Trump: (24:44) Many of those people, most of those people are tested, depending on what portion of the Oval Office area they’re going in. Everybody coming into the President’s office gets tested, and I felt no vulnerability whatsoever, John. But the two people, as I said, and three people are, they have been tested and it’s negative, and there’ll be probably out of quarantine very quickly. Okay? John?Donald Trump: (25:20) Very soon. I mean, really very soon. It’s an interesting question, because normally you would have said that you are not tested and you would have been knocking us for not getting tested. So if we get tested, it’s a problem, and if we don’t get tested, it’s a problem. But I like the way your question was phrased better this way, because it is a positive.Donald Trump: (25:39) We are tested. We have great capability. You look at all of these machines here. They’re incredible machines, the best anywhere in the world. No place in the world has this kind of equipment. Other countries are calling, sophisticated countries, and they’re calling, lots of countries, and we’re trying to make as much as we can available to them because there’s nothing like what we’ve been able to do in literally a couple of months.Donald Trump: (26:04) What they’ve been able to do, the private sector, how they got it done. This is a five to 15-minute test, as an example, the Abbott Laboratories test. These tests are highly sophisticated, very quick, very good. This is things that didn’t even exist a short while ago. So we do have a great testing capability at the White House. We’re doing it, and I think generally speaking, we had a call with the governors the other day, generally speaking, without exception, they were all extremely happy with what’s going on with respect to their testing. Okay?Donald Trump: (26:46) We’re leaving that up to the governors, as you know, and if we see something wrong, we’ll call them out and we’ll stop it, but we are leaving it up to the governors. Some are being not aggressive enough in my opinion, and some are being a little bit aggressive, but they’re being very careful. And the people of the country, they’ve learned a lot over the last two months. They’ve learned about social distancing and washing your hands and other things that we’ve all learned and talked about. They’ve learned about, I see everybody, just about everybody, has a face mask on. They’ve learned about face masks, the good and the bad, by the way. It’s not a one-sided thing, believe it or not.Donald Trump: (27:20) But our country has learned. Our country has been incredible. And you see the numbers. They’re dropping very substantially. The numbers are dropping around our country very, very substantially. So we leave that, John, up to the governors, and I think they’re making a lot of good decisions. We’ve had, as I said, a great relationship with governors, Democrat and Republican. And I think overall they’re making very good decisions. Nobody in this group. All the ones behind the rope. That’s interesting. Please.Donald Trump: (28:02) No, we’ve prevailed on testing is what I’m referring to. That was with regard to testing. You never prevail when you have 90,000 people, a hundred thousand people, when you have 80,000 people as of today, when you have the kind of death you’re talking about, when you have potentially millions of people throughout the world that are dying, that’s not prevail.Donald Trump: (28:26) What I’m talking about is we have a great testing capacity now. It’s getting even better. There’s nobody close to us in the world, and we certainly have done a great job on testing, and testing is a big, is a very big, important function. By the way, some people consider it more important than others, to be honest with you, but testing certainly is a very important function, and we have prevailed. We have the best equipment anywhere in the world. Okay, please. Yeah. Please, go ahead.Donald Trump: (29:06) So what else is new with China? What else is new? Tell me. I’m not happy with China. They should have stopped this at the source. They could have stopped it right at the source. So now you’re telling me their hacking. So I just say this, Steve, what else is new? We’re watching it very closely.Donald Trump: (29:37) No, not at all. Not even a little bit. No. I’m not interested. We signed a deal. I had heard that too. They’d like to reopen the trade talk to make it a better deal for them. China has been taking advantage of the United States for many, many years, for decades, because we had people at this position right here where I’m standing, sitting right in that office, the Oval Office, that allowed that to happen. No, I’m not interested in that. Let’s see if they live up to the deal that they signed. Okay? Please, go ahead.Donald Trump: (30:18) Well, we’re talking about that with a lot of different people. I want to see a payroll tax cut, I want to see various things that we want, I want the workers to be taken care of, but we are talking about that. We’re negotiating with the Democrats. We’ll see what happens.Donald Trump: (30:34) But as I said, it’s a transition and this is really going to be, in my opinion, we’ll see, but I think it’s going to be something that’s going to be very special. It’s a transition to greatness, and greatness is next year, right from the beginning. I think we’re going to do fantastically well.Donald Trump: (30:52) I view the third quarter, as I said, as a transition quarter. Could be pretty good, but a transition quarter. Toward the end of the fourth quarter, you’re going to see some numbers that are going to be tremendous, I think, and next year, you’re going to have potentially the kind of numbers that you saw before and maybe even better because there is that pent-up demand.Donald Trump: (31:13) A lot of people wanted to do things. They were ready to do things, and they’ve had to hold back because of the virus. So I think you’re going to have with that pent-up demand, a phenomenal year next year, unless somebody messes it up by coming along and raising taxes, doubling, tripling, quadrupling your taxes, like a certain party, namely, the Democrats want to do, you’ll mess it all up.Donald Trump: (31:36) You know, we had the greatest in the world. I presided, this administration presided over it. It got great for a reason and we’ll do it again and we’ll do it again very quickly and very easily. I see that happening. Yes, ma’am. Please.Donald Trump: (32:03) Well, if they’re a certain distance from me, or if they’re a certain distance from each other, they do. In the case of me, I’m not close to anybody. I’d like to be close to these two gentlemen, they’re hardworking, great men, but they just said, “Frankly, let’s keep it this way.” So obviously in my case, I’m very far away from everyone. But if you look at all of those people over there, every one of them, from what I see, these are White House staffers, they’re White House representatives, they’re White House executives, and everybody has a mask on. We’ve had just about everybody I’ve seen today has worn a mask. Yeah.Donald Trump: (32:41) Yeah, I did. I did. I required it. Yes. Please, go ahead.Donald Trump: (33:00) Well, it’s a true statement already. We have more testing than any country in the world by far, but I’ll let Admiral go into a little bit of the future.Donald Trump: (34:33) Phil?Donald Trump: (34:33) Go ahead.Donald Trump: (34:42) Yeah.Donald Trump: (34:47) And you know what, if we didn’t get the tests, if we did no tests in the White House, you’d be up complaining, “Why aren’t you getting tests for the White House?” See, we can’t win. Because if we didn’t get the tests, you’d be up… I understand you very, better than you understand yourself. And frankly, if we didn’t get tests done, you’d be up complaining about the fact that we didn’t have the tests done.Donald Trump: (35:05) Now that we’re doing so well on tests and so quick and so fast, five minutes, et cetera, and so accurate, you’re complaining that we’re getting too many tests. So you can’t win. Go ahead, Phil.Donald Trump: (35:34) Well, when you say some,, so we have a person. And the person, something happened right after a test was done. Three other people met that person, came into relative contact, very little contact, and they’re self-quarantining. That is not exactly not controlling it. I think we’ve controlled it very well. We have hundreds and hundreds of people a day pouring into the White House. It’s a massive office complex, including the very large building right behind us that you know so well.Donald Trump: (36:04) So I think we’re really doing a very good job in watching it. And I think it’s very well-contained, actually. And part of the reason, it is because of all the tests we’re able to give, but it was one person and the other people were only people that are quarantined. You understand this field, they’re quarantined for a specific reason. The reason is they were in the general proximity of the one person. And the one person I believe will be fine in a very short period of time.Donald Trump: (36:36) Well, that I’m going to have to ask that he will give you that information. Whatever he is proceeding and doing, he will give you that information. I’ll make sure that they put out a notice. John, go ahead, please.Donald Trump: (37:04) Yeah.Donald Trump: (37:14) Yeah. We’re seeing that all over the world now with young children, very, very tiny percentage, but it’s still, it’s the swelling and the skin rash. And we’re looking at that very closely. John. It’s a phenomena that’s just been brought to everyone’s attention a couple of weeks ago. Admiral, you may have something to say about that.Donald Trump: (39:05) Well, again, it’s a tiny percentage, but you’re right. So we’re looking into it very strongly. And the Admiral, as he said, he’s known about this for long before this happened, but it is a very, very small percentage. And people recover from that. The children recover from that, right?Donald Trump: (39:50) We’re studying that very closely. And it’s a been on the radar for weeks, actually, because we’ve seen this for quite a while, but it’s been very rare. But we’re, we’re looking at it very closely. It’s very important to us. I think one of the things we’re most proud of is this just came out, deaths per 100,000 people, death. So deaths for 100,000 people, Germany and the United States are at the lowest rung of that ladder. Meaning low is a positive, not a negative. Germany and the United States are the two best in deaths per 100,000 people. Which frankly, to me, that’s perhaps the most important number there is. Please, go in the back, please.Donald Trump: (41:07) Well, the Vice President, first of all, has been tested and he’s negative. And was tested yesterday, tested today. And he’s negative. He’s in very good shape. And I think that that’s going to be fine. As far as Americans getting a test, they should all be able to get a test right now. They should be able to get a test. That’s the problem with a question like that. We go through a whole announcement saying we’re number one in the world by far, by a factor of two and even three and four, depending on where you’re looking. And I get a question. “When will everybody be able to get tested?”Donald Trump: (41:37) If somebody wants to be tested right now, they’ll be able to be tested. As far as the incident in Georgia, I think it’s horrible. And it’s certainly being looked at by many people. I’m speaking to many people about it. He looked, I saw the picture of him and his tuxedo, it was so beautiful. He looks like a wonderful young guy would have been a wonderful, just a wonderful guy. I think it’s a horrible thing. I think it’s a horrible thing.Donald Trump: (42:05) Now, with that being said, as you know, they’re studying the case very carefully. They’re interviewing everybody involved and we’ll see what happens. To me, it’s a very sad thing. I spoke to a number of people that are very much involved in it. I’ve been following that one very closely. It breaks your heart to watch it. It breaks your heart. And certainly the video was… it was a terrible looking video to me. But you have a lot of people looking at it and hopefully an answer’s going to be arrived at very quickly. But it’s something that is heartbreaking.Donald Trump: (42:42) Go ahead.Donald Trump: (42:53) Yeah. Well, I saw the tape and when they moved left, I don’t believe, when they moved left outside of the tape, nobody saw what was going on. It’s an empty spot on the tape. Now do they have additional tapes? I hope, but I will say that it’s something that based on what I saw, doesn’t look good. Somebody that I have a lot of respect for is Senator Scott of South Carolina. You know who I’m talking about? He’s a great gentleman. He’s a great Senator, he’s a great gentleman, Tim Scott. And I called him two days ago. I said, “Tim, what do you think? Tell me, what do you think?” He’s very disturbed by it. He’s very disturbed. And I’m very disturbed, also. Please, go ahead.Donald Trump: (44:02) No, we just wanted to make sure we had the proper machinery, apparatus and everything else out there before people started wasting money. So method of saving money. We wanted to make sure we had even things like this. Plus they have machines that are far more complex than this. They have massive machines at some of the laboratories that can do millions of tests. We wanted to make sure everything was in place. Okay, go ahead.Donald Trump: (44:43) Well, I think that if you look at Pennsylvania, as an example, if you look at various other states, I won’t get into them, the people want to go back. The numbers are getting to a point where they can and there just seems to be no effort on certain blue states to get back into gear and the people aren’t going to stand for it. They want to get back. They’re not going to stand for it. They want our country open. I want our country open too. I wand it open safely, but I want it open.Donald Trump: (45:11) Don’t forget, people are dying the other route. You can go with the enclosed route. Everything’s closed up, you’re in your house. You’re not allowed to move. People are dying with that too. You look at drug addiction, you look at suicides, you look at some of the things that are taking place. People are dying that way too. You could make the case it’s in even greater numbers. So it’s a situation that some people, and I’ve noticed that some states could be moving more quickly. And also at the same time, safety. Look, safety is paramount, but people are dying in the lockdown position too. And everybody understands that. They’re just starting to find out. And look at what’s going on with drugs and look at what’s happening with suicides. Yeah, please, please go ahead.Donald Trump: (46:20) Well, excuse me, the numbers are way down from what they were two weeks ago. The numbers are really coming down and very substantially. This weekend was one of the lowest we’ve had. The numbers are coming down very rapidly all throughout the country, By the way, there may be one exception. But all throughout the country, the numbers are coming down rapidly. I think you see that, Admiral.Donald Trump: (46:53) Well, the models haven’t been exactly accurate. These are models done by a lot of think tanks. A lot of universities. You look at some of the models they’ve been way off. A few of the models have been accurate. But as far as the models are concerned, if you go by the model, we were going to lose 2.2 million people. And because we mitigated, we did things that were very tough for our country to do, frankly. We had to turn off our whole magnificent economy. We had to turn down the whole country. We’re at the lowest of all of the models. If you look at that 100 to 120, 000 people would be at the low side and we’re at… there’s nothing low. Look, nothing low. One is too many people.Donald Trump: (47:39) And I say it all the time. One person to lose for this is too many people. It’s a disgrace what happened. But if you look at the models, we’re at the lowest of those projections. But the models are not models done necessarily by the White House, they’re models done by many people all over the world. And if you take the most respected of those people, many of those models are wrong…Donald Trump: (48:03) The most respected of those people, many of those models are wrong, I mean, they’ve been wrong as far as the U.S. is concerned because those numbers are nowhere near what was projected, potentially.Donald Trump: (48:15) You know what, I don’t want to think about it even. I know that we’re doing everything we can, we’re doing a good job. We acted very early. We acted extremely early in keeping China out of our country and banning people from China coming in, other than our citizens, which we obviously had to take and they were quarantined or watched carefully, they were tested, they were watched very carefully. But we had about 40,000 people coming in from China, from Asia and we had to obviously take the people. Can you imagine if I said, you’re a U.S. citizen, we’re not going to take you. That doesn’t work. But they were very carefully … I was with Ron DeSantis, he said, literally put the people that came in from China in quarantine for a substantial period of time.Donald Trump: (48:58) No, that was a big decision. I think we saved hundreds of thousands of lives by acting very early. And when I did this, I think the Admiral can say it, everybody was against my doing it. Everybody, everybody was. The professionals, the doctors, I was pretty much by myself on that one and it was a lucky thing we did it because we saved hundreds of thousands of lives. Yeah, please go ahead.Donald Trump: (49:38) Well, I would certainly consider that. I will mandate it if you’d like I would, I think it’s important to do. And I think frankly, some of the governors were very lax with respect to nursing homes. It was obvious right from the beginning of the state of Washington, where 26 or 28 people died very early on. And I would have said nursing homes and I did say nursing homes. That’s what they should. Now some of the states, many of the states are doing that, but I think all of the states should be, they have the capacity to do it. They should be doing nursing home. That is a real vulnerability.Donald Trump: (50:22) No, not at all. I’m only aware of people that saw them were tested. The tests were negative and they’re quarantining anyway. Please, go ahead.Donald Trump: (50:46) Well, first of all, the job he’s done on task force, the job he has done frankly, as the Vice President of the United States has been outstanding. And he’s a warrior too, just like doctors and nurses, I mean he is working so hard and he’s coming into contact with a lot of people, but again, he tested negative so we have to understand that. But he comes into contact with a lot of people. It’s something probably during this quarantine period we’ll probably talk about. I have not seen him since then, but I would say that he and I will be talking about that. Yeah, we could talk on the phone. Please.Donald Trump: (52:32) Go ahead, Bill.Donald Trump: (52:52) Obamagate, it’s been going on for a long time. It’s been going on from before I even got elected and it’s a disgrace that it happened. And if you look at what’s gone on, and if you look at now all of this information that’s being released. And from what I understand, that’s only the beginning. Some terrible things happened and it should never be allowed to happen in our country again. And you’ll be seeing what’s going on over the coming weeks. And I wish you’d write honestly about it, but unfortunately you choose not to do so. Yeah, John, please.Donald Trump: (53:24) You know what the crime is, the crime is very obvious to everybody. All you have to do is read the newspapers except yours. John, please.Donald Trump: (53:43) Yes.Donald Trump: (53:51) Well, I going to have the Admiral … but I will say just from listening and hearing like you do, we all do, not should get a test because they have to have certain things. And they’re going to know when they’re not feeling right. Those are the people that will be getting the test, but Admiral, I’ll let you take it from there, please.Donald Trump: (55:29) And John, the numbers are coming way down and they’re coming down rapidly and that’s a beautiful thing to see. And that’s pretty much universally all across the country. They’re coming down very rapidly so very important. Please go ahead.Donald Trump: (56:51) And the meat packing plants now are doing very well. There’s great testing around those plants. And we’re finding out who had the problem, they’re being quarantined. And the meat packing is moving along very nicely, but they were trouble spots. They were hot zones definitely, please. One thing I think is very important though, John, just to finish, we have now, and nobody says it, they just don’t want to write it, by far more tests than any other country in the world not even a contest. And the quality of our test is the best anywhere in the world. That’s very important to say, please go ahead.Donald Trump: (59:29) If people want to get tested, they get tested. We have the greatest capacity in the world not even close. If people want to get tested, they get tested. But for the most part, they shouldn’t want to get tested. There’s no reason, they feel good, they don’t have sniffles, they don’t have sore throats. They don’t have any problem. If they do feel there’s something happening, they have the absolute easy. In fact, Ron DeSantis, Florida, the governor is doing a fantastic job in Florida. He said, he’s got a little bit of the opposite problem. He’s got so much testing that people sit around and wait for people to come in. That they have a great overcapacity for testing. And there are numerous other states that have told me the same thing. That’s by the way, a good problem, not a bad problem, okay. Yeah, go ahead please.Donald Trump: (01:00:22) Yes.Donald Trump: (01:00:33) Well, they’re losing their lives everywhere in the world. And maybe that’s a question you should ask China, don’t ask me, ask China that question, okay. When you ask them that question, you may get a very unusual answer. Yes, behind you, please.Donald Trump: (01:00:53) I’m telling you.Donald Trump: (01:00:54) I’m not saying it specifically to anybody. I’m saying it to anybody that would ask a nasty question like that.Donald Trump: (01:00:59) Please go ahead.Donald Trump: (01:01:01) Okay, anybody else? Please go ahead in the back please.Donald Trump: (01:01:09) No, it’s okay, we’ll go over here.Donald Trump: (01:01:09) Next, next please.Donald Trump: (01:01:13) I did and you didn’t respond and now I’m calling on the young lady in the back, please.Donald Trump: (01:01:19) Okay, ladies and gentlemen thank you very much, appreciate it.Donald Trump: (01:01:23) Thank you very much.President Donald Trump: (00:03) Thank you very much. At my direction, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is issuing guidance for communities of faith. I want to thank Dr. Redfield and the CDC for their work on this matter and all the other work they’ve been doing over the past what now seems like a long period of time. Today I’m identifying houses of worship, churches, synagogue and mosques as essential places that provide essential services. Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential, but have left out churches and other houses of worship. It’s not right. So I’m correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential. I call upon governors to allow our churches and places of worship to open right now.President Donald Trump: (01:06) If there’s any question, they’re going to have to call me, but they’re not going to be successful in that call. These are places that hold our society together and keep our people united. The people are demanding to go to church and synagogue, go to their mosque. Many millions of Americans embrace worship as an essential part of life. The ministers, pastors, rabbis, imams and other faith leaders will make sure that their congregations are safe as they gather and pray. I know them well. They love their congregations. They love their people. They don’t want anything bad to happen to them or to anybody else. The governors need to do the right thing and allow these very important, essential places of faith to open right now for this weekend. If they don’t do it, I will override the governors. In America, we need more prayer, not less. Thank you very much. Thank you.Donald Trump: (00:11) Thank you very much. Thank you very much. It’s very hot today. Please sit down. This is going to be a very hot one and we apologize to everybody out there that’s got to suffer through it. But you know what? It’s better than bad weather and it’s great to be in the rose garden. I want to especially thank this group for joining us as we announce a historic groundbreaking initiative in our ongoing effort to rapidly develop and manufacture a coronavirus vaccine. We’re joined by secretary Steven Mnuchin, Secretary Mark Esper, Secretary Alex Azar, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Mark Milley, FDA Director, Dr. Stephen Hahn, Director of the National Institute of Health, Dr. Francis Collins, Dr. Fauci, Dr. Birx. We’re joined by a very terrific group of professionals.Donald Trump: (01:10) Tomorrow will mark 30 days since we released the White House guidelines for a safe and phased opening of America. That’s what we’re doing. It’s the opening of America. We’re going to have an amazing year next year. We’re going to have a great transition into the fourth quarter. As of this morning, almost every state has taken steps to begin reopening and the American people are doing an extraordinary job of continuing to take precautions while at the same time wanting to start, and they will be starting, to resume their American way of life. We will be reigniting our economic engines. We’re going to be taking care of our most vulnerable, which are our senior citizens and some others. We’re going to be working very, very hard on our senior citizens and our nursing homes and various communities to support those that are struggling in this very difficult time. Others don’t have the same kind of struggle.Donald Trump: (02:14) For example, today, Secretary Perdue, together with Ivanka Trump, launched the Farmers and Families Food Box Program, which will provide $3 billion to help small farmers. And it will be helping farmers, ranchers, but it’ll be bringing food to some of the food lines and some of the food kitchens that you’ve been seeing on television. And I said, “Why aren’t we doing that? We have all of this tremendous food produced by our farmers and our ranchers.” And so we’re going to be buying $3 billion worth of that food, great for everybody. Our farmers, our ranchers, and the people that need great food.Donald Trump: (02:51) A key feature of our reopening plan is the largest and most ambitious testing system in the world by far. America is now conducting close to 350,000 tests per day, an unthinkable number just a short while ago, more than anybody in the world by far, suggesting many states now have excess testing capacity to monitor for new outbreaks. Florida, many other states have so much testing the testers are waiting for people to show up. It’s great.Donald Trump: (03:23) Another essential pillar of our strategy to keep America open is the development of effective treatments and vaccines as quickly as possible. Want to see if we can do that very quickly. We’re looking to, when I say quickly, we’re looking to get it by the end of the year if we can, maybe before. We’re doing tremendously well. From the earliest days of the pandemic, we have marshaled the genius of American scientists and researchers from all across government and the private sector, from academia, from everywhere to vanquish the virus, and tremendous strides have been made. Can tell you, I get to see it every day. Tremendous strides are being made. Scientists at the NIH began developing the first vaccine candidate on January 11th, think of that, within hours of the virus’s genetic code being posted online. So January 11th, most people never even heard what was going on January 11th. And we were out there trying to develop a vaccine, not even knowing what we were up against. Then my administration cut through every piece of red tape to achieve the fastest ever, by far, launch of a vaccine trial for this new virus, this very vicious virus. And I want to thank all of the doctors and scientists and researchers involved because they’ve never moved like this or never even close.Donald Trump: (04:51) The NIH and the HHS have also been working constantly with private industry to evaluate more than 100 potential treatments. The Food and Drug Administration has swiftly approved more than 130 therapies for active trials. That’s what we have right now, 130. And another 450 are in the planning stages and tremendous potential awaits. I think we’re going to have some very interesting things to report in the not too distant future. And thank you very much to Dr. Hahn. Through a historic series of funding bills, my administration is providing roughly $10 billion to support a medical research effort without parallel. I especially want to thank Senator Steve Daines of Montana for his incredible work. He has worked so hard to secure additional funding for vaccine development. He has been right at the forefront.Donald Trump: (05:49) Today, I want to update you on the next stage of this momentous medical initiative. It’s called Operation Warp Speed. That means big and it means fast, a massive scientific, industrial and logistical endeavor unlike anything our country has seen since the Manhattan Project. You really could say that nobody’s seen anything like we’re doing, whether it’s ventilators or testing. Nobody’s seen anything like we’re doing now within our country since the second World War, incredible. Its objective is to finish developing and then to manufacture and distribute a proven coronavirus vaccine as fast as possible. Again, we’d love to see if we could do it prior to the end of the year. We think we’re going to have some very good results coming out very quickly.Donald Trump: (06:41) In addition, it will continue accelerating the development of diagnostics and breakthrough therapies. The great national project will bring together the best of American industry and innovation, the full resources of the United States government, and the excellence and precision of the United States military. We have the military totally involved. We’re also working very strongly with other countries who are also have some great, great scientists, doctors, and we’re all working very closely together and they’re viewing us as the leader and we are. The relationship with other countries on solving this problem has been incredible. Today, the Operation Warp Speed has brought together all of the experts across the federal government from places like the NIH, CDC, FDA, and many other agencies. This historic partnership will now bring together the full resources of the Department of Health and Human Services with the Department of Defense. And we know what that means. That means the full power and strength of military, the military, and that really talking about the logistics. We get it when we get it. That means the logistics, getting it out so that everybody can take it.Donald Trump: (07:59) And today, we’re proud to announce the addition of two of the most highly respected skilled professionals in our country, worldwide respected. Operation Warp Speed’s chief scientists will be Dr. Moncef Slaoui, a world renowned immunologist who helped create 14 new vaccines, that’s a lot of our new vaccines, in 10 years during his time in the private sector. One of the most respected men in the world in the production and, really, on the formulation of vaccines. Joining Dr. Slaoui as Chief Operating Officer will be General Gus Perna, a four star general who currently oversees 190,000 service members, civilians, and contractors as Commander of the US Army Material Command. That means logistics. That means getting it out. We’ve got to get it out there. So General, thank you very much. And doctor, thank you very much. It’s great to have you on board. Really highly respected people. Thank you.Donald Trump: (09:03) It’s great to have you on board. Really highly respected people. Thank you.Donald Trump: (09:05) These two outstanding individuals will provide more details following my remarks. In preparation for this initiative, experts throughout the government have been collaborating to evaluate roughly 100 vaccine candidates from all over the world. They have identified 14 that they believe are the most promising and they’re working to narrow that list still further. So we started off with over 100, we’re down to 14, and we have some really interesting choices to be made. They’re doing very well.Donald Trump: (09:36) Through Operation Warp Speed, the federal government is providing unprecedented support and resources to safely expedite the trials. Moving on at record, record, record speed. While we accelerate the final phases of vaccine trials, Operation Warp Speed will be simultaneously accelerating its manufacturing and manufacturing process. In other words, we’re getting ready so that when we get the good word that we have the vaccine, we have the formula, we have what we need, we’re ready to go. As opposed to taking years to gear up. We’re gearing up. It’s risky, it’s expensive, but we’ll be saving massive amounts of time. We’ll be saving years if we do this properly. And that’s what we’re doing. So we’re gearing up on the assumption that we’ll have in the near future, relatively near future, a vaccine.Donald Trump: (10:35) Typically pharmaceutical companies wait to manufacture a vaccine until it has received all of the regulatory approvals necessary. And this can delay vaccines availability to the public as much as a year, and even more than that. However, our task is so urgent that under Operation Warp Speed, the federal government will invest in manufacturing all of the top vaccine candidates before they’re approved. So we’re knowing exactly what we’re doing before they’re approved. That means they better come up with a good vaccine, because we’re ready to deliver it. This will eliminate any unnecessary delay and enable us to begin providing Americans with a proven vaccine the day our scientists say, “We’re ready, we got it.”Donald Trump: (11:23) And as we work to bring critical medical production back to America, these vaccines that we’re going to be focused on and manufacturing, they’re all going to be right here in the USA. Now we’re working, as I said, with other people outside, and that’s fine too. We want to get to the solution. We know exactly where the other countries are and we’ll be very happy if they were able to do it. We’ll help them with delivery, we’ll help them with it in every way we can. We have no ego when it comes to this. No ego whatsoever. Operation Warp Speed is also making the necessary preparations to distribute these life saving treatments at scale. So we’re talking about massive numbers so that millions of Americans will quickly have access to them. This includes ramping up production of supplies needed for distribution. And I have to say, we’re also very, very much involved in other things other than the vaccine. If you take a look at what we’re doing beyond vaccines, it’s going to be very interesting. We may talk about that in a little while. But this includes ramping up production of supplies needed for distribution, such as cold chain storage, glass vials, needles, syringes, and more. We’ll have everything right on hand, ready to go.Donald Trump: (12:51) When a vaccine is ready, the US government will deploy every plane, truck and soldier required to help distribute it to the American people as quickly as possible. America’s blessed to have the most brilliant, talented doctors and researchers anywhere in the world. We have the mightiest military by far in the world. Our military is completely rebuilt. Much of the equipment has been delivered. Some of it’s on the way. All made right here in the USA. We took over very, very empty cupboards, I say, medically. We also had empty cupboards in a military sense. Our military was in sad shape. It was depleted. We now have the strongest military the United States has ever had by far, and the best equipment. And you hear that outside, that beautiful sound, those are truckers that are with us all the way. They’re protesting in favor of President Trump, as opposed to against. There’s hundreds of trucks out there. And that’s the sign of love, not the sign of your typical protest. So I want to thank our great truckers. They like me and I like them. We’re working on something together.Donald Trump: (13:58) But we have the mightiest… And they’ll be helping us with this, by the way. Speaking of truckers. We have the mightiest military in the long history of humankind. We have the best and most devoted workers ever to walk the face of the earth. And now we’re combining all of these amazing strengths for the most aggressive vaccine project in history. There’s never been a vaccine project anywhere in history like this. And I just want to make something clear. It’s very important, vaccine or no vaccine, we’re back. And we’re starting the process. And in many cases they don’t have vaccines and a virus or a flu comes and you fight through it. We haven’t seen anything like this in 100 and some odd years, 1917, but you fight through it. And people sometimes, I guess, we don’t know exactly yet, but it looks like they become immune or at least for a short while and maybe for life. But you fight through it. But what we’d like to do, if we can, is the vaccine. And I think we’re going to be successful in doing it, and hopefully by the end of the year.Donald Trump: (15:03) Just as generations of Americans before us faced down the most difficult trials, set their sights on the highest summit and overcame the biggest obstacles, america will meet the moment, and this moment specifically in our time, with unrivaled speed, unmatched scale, and the unyielding spirit of the American people. Our nation will come back stronger and greater than ever. We’re going to have a tremendous year next year. We’re going to have a really good fourth quarter. We’re going to have a very interesting and productive transition quarter, where Steve is there, And I’m sure our Secretary of the Treasury, I think you feel the same way, Steve. And thank you for your good work. Really good work. And it’s not finished yet, is it? I want to thank Steve Mnuchin, everybody.Donald Trump: (15:51) Now I’d like to ask Dr. [Slowey and 00:15:54] and General Perna to come up and say a few words, followed by Secretary Azar and Secretary Esper. Thank you all very much. We’re doing something that has never been done before. It’s a going to result in a tremendous end. I think we’re going to come up with a solution to a problem like this country probably has never seen before. But it’s an honor to be your president. We’re doing a great job. These people are doing an incredible job. The people right here, I want to thank you all. Total professionals. Great men, great women. Thank you all very much. Please.Donald Trump: (18:17) Thank you.Donald Trump: (19:22) Thank you very much. I appreciate it.Donald Trump: (23:01) I know you will. I know you will. Any questions please? Yeah, go ahead.Donald Trump: (23:14) We think we’re going to have a vaccine in the pretty near future. And if we do, we’re going to really be a big step ahead. And if we don’t, we’re going to be like so many other cases where you had a problem come in, it’ll go away. At some point, it’ll go away. It may flare up and it may not flare up, we’ll have to see what happens. But if it does flare up, we’re going to put out the fire and we’ll put it out quickly and efficiently. We’ve learned a lot. Steve, do you have a question?Donald Trump: (23:51) Well, they started… Actually, I guess you heard in early January and they’ve been on it… I know so many, and private companies have been working on it. The government’s been working on it. We’ve got the time because we put a very… And they’ve literally been working 24 hours a day. We’ve got the time, and we hope to be able to do something by the end of the year or shortly thereafter.Donald Trump: (24:16) But again, it’s not solely vaccine based. Other things have never had a vaccine and they go away. I don’t want people to think that this is all dependent on a vaccine, but a vaccine would be a tremendous thing. And I will tell you, therapeutically or therapeutics, what’s going on there is equally as oppressive. We have some things happening. We have the remdesivir from Gilead. We have other things that are very good. I think that a lot is happening therapeutically. I can’t say that it’s relatively-speaking equal to what’s going on with vaccines, but I think it’s doing very well, very well. Therapeutics are a big factor. Yeah, please.Donald Trump: (25:08) Yeah. We have that very well worked out. Whoever gets it is going to be very proud to give it, and they’ve developed it. And we’ll see what happens. We’ve got countries that are allies. We have some countries, frankly, that aren’t allies, we’re working very closely together. We’re working together with many different countries. And again, we have no ego. We have no ego. Whoever gets it, we think it’s great. We’re going to work with them. They’re going to work with us. Likewise, if we get it, we’re going to be working with them. It’s very important. It’s very good question actually. Yeah, please.Donald Trump: (25:54) Well, I thought the guidance was very good. I’ve heard very good reviews on the guidance. The media will never be satisfied. If we gave you more description, that would be no good. If we gave you less, that would be no good. But I thought it was very good and I’ve heard a lot of good things. Go ahead, please, Green.Donald Trump: (26:16) No, Abbott’s a great test. It’s a very quick test and it can always be very rapidly double-checked. If you’re testing positive or negative, it can always be double-checked, but it’s a very good test. It’s very portable, very quick. Okay.Donald Trump: (26:37) I would say the answer to that would be yes. I would say the answer would be yes. Yes, go ahead please.Donald Trump: (26:49) Excuse me, you’re going to have to remove it. You can’t hear through your…Donald Trump: (27:12) No, we’re looking for a full vaccine for everyone that wants to get it. Not everybody’s going to want to get it, but we’re looking at a full vaccine. Is that a correct statement?Donald Trump: (27:22) Please.Donald Trump: (27:46) We’ve all been tested. I’ve been tested. We’ve all been tested and we’re quite a distance away and we’re outdoor. So I told them, I gave them the option. They could wear it or not. So you can blame it on me, but I gave them the option. We could wear it or not. Yeah, please.Donald Trump: (28:09) The last thing anybody’s looking for is profit in terms of what we’re doing. Every company, they want to get it out. We’ve had a great experience on [inaudible 00:01:19]. We’ve had a great experience on everything we’ve done. People are looking to come up with the answer. They’re not looking in … Typically they’re saying, “How much am I going to make? How much?” They really have been, there’s been a great spirit on this. They want to get to the bottom of it. And I think we’ll be able to do that.Donald Trump: (28:44) So, India has been so great. And as you know, your prime minister has been a very good friend of mine. I just got back a short while ago from India recently, and we’re working very much with India too. We have a tremendous Indian population in the United States. Many of the people that you’re talking about are working on the vaccine too, great scientists and researchers. Yeah. We’re working very closely also with India. Correct. And say hello to your prime minister. Yeah, please. Go ahead.Donald Trump: (29:30) Yeah, I think we’ve done a good job with that. Certain areas have been hit very hard, New York, New Jersey, et cetera, et cetera, working very closely with the governors. We’ve worked with all of the governors. We’ve made a lot of people look very good with what we’ve done on ventilators, with what we’ve done on testing. We’re working with all of the governors. We just sent a big transit package to New Jersey. I just spoke to the governor of New Jersey, who is a terrific person, by the way, I have to tell you. And I just told him, “A lot of money’s coming way for the transit.” And also I spoke with the governor of New York, Governor Cuomo. We just had a conversation yesterday. We’re sending them a lot of transportation money. So it’s important. But we’ve had a very good relationship working with all of the states, regardless. All of the states. And if we do get fortunate enough, and I think we’re skilled enough, but fortunate enough to have a vaccine, it’ll get out fairly and quickly.Donald Trump: (30:31) I think that makes sense, perhaps. Perhaps it does, but I would say probably, but I think they’re all going to get well distributed. If you remember where we started, we had no ventilators. We had to make them and we became a very major manufacturer of ventilators. Now we’re helping countries all over the world with ventilators. We’re sending them to many countries all over the world. When we started, we didn’t have ventilators. I inherited nothing. I inherited practically nothing from the previous administration, unfortunately. Yeah, go ahead.Donald Trump: (31:18) Well, I don’t want to talk about it. I can say China is buying a lot of our product, but the trade deal, the ink was barely dry when this came in from China. So it’s not like we’re thrilled. Okay, go ahead. Please.Donald Trump: (31:31) Yeah.Donald Trump: (31:39) Well, I don’t know what happened. I know that Voice of America is run in a terrible manner, terrible. They’re not the voice of America, they’re the opposite of the voice of America. And we have a man who is very good. I don’t know. He’s in the nominating process, but I’ll have to check that out. Yeah, please.Donald Trump: (32:10) Well, I think a very big factor frankly is that very few people are … We read about all of the very sad, very tragic. I’ve lost friends. Many of us have lost friends. We read about that and we see that, and that’s what the news covers, but it’s a very small percentage. It’s a very, very small percentage. I say it all the time. It’s a tiny percentage. The vast majority, many people don’t even know they have it. They have it or they have sniffles or they have a very minor sign and they recover. Not only recover, they probably have immunity, whether it’s short term, long term, but they have probably immunity. And I think people have to understand that. That’s why I think the schools should be back in the fall. I think that lots of things should happen. I don’t think that you should have 70 year old teachers back yet. They should wait until everything is gone. I don’t think you should have a professor that’s 65 and has diabetes, or has a bad heart back necessarily, or somebody that’s older than that. But we want to see our schools back.Donald Trump: (33:14) We want to see our country start to work again. We created the greatest economy in the history of the world and we’re going to do it again. And you’re going to see that next year. And it’s going to start, you’ll start to see it in the fourth quarter, maybe even before that. Yeah.Donald Trump: (33:38) I’m concerned about everything. And I’m also concerned about our country. Our country has to get back. What you’re talking is when you are doing what we did with the shutdown, that causes death also. It causes massive depression. It causes drugs, it causes suicide. It causes a lot of problems also. No, our country has to get back to work again. And you see that just looking and reading everything that’s happening are people want to get back. They want to get back. Yeah.Donald Trump: (34:10) We do. We do. We have a great plan to prevent the spread, but that doesn’t mean we’re going to close our country for five years. Okay. Not going to happen.Donald Trump: (34:17) Go ahead.Donald Trump: (34:23) At current, it’s about 86,000. Yes.Donald Trump: (34:30) Or lower than that, I don’t know. I don’t know. Those are the numbers that are being reported. I assume they’re correct. Unlike other countries, I mean, you have some countries, obviously, you have some that are very obviously ridiculous, but our numbers are accurate numbers. We don’t do anything with the numbers one way or the other. Whatever it is, that’s what we do. We take the numbers as reported. Okay?Donald Trump: (34:53) Oh, I don’t know. I don’t know. If they were, I’d be very happy if they were lower. I’d like to see numbers lower. I’d like to see no death at all. One death is too many. This should have never happened. This came from China. It should have been stopped in China before it got out to the world. We have 186, it’s been updated this morning, 186 countries are affected, and each country that’s affected is the same thing. Russia now is badly affected. France is badly affected. You look at what each country, and you can say affected, or you can say infected, either way you want to put it, but you look at these countries. Look at Italy and you look at Spain and you look at all of these great countries in many cases, how they’ve had to fight through this. It’s a terrible thing that happened. It could have been stopped at the source. It should have been stopped right at the source, but it wasn’t. Thank you all very much. We appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you.Donald Trump: (00:05) Yes.Donald Trump: (00:19) Well, I think actually the decision to close the country was the biggest decision I’ve ever had to make and I’ve said that very loud and clear. I mean we had the greatest economy in history, in the history of the world, not only our economy, it was our greatest economy, best employment numbers, best numbers in every single way. And they said, sir, we have to close the country. I said, what are you talking about close the country? Because nobody’s ever heard of such a thing. And we saved millions of lives by doing it. And by putting the ban on China very early was a big thing.Donald Trump: (00:50) But the biggest decision I’ve ever had to make is closing the country. And certainly this is now also a big decision, but the people want to go back to work.Donald Trump: (01:19) It’s possible there will be some because you won’t be locked into an apartment or a house or whatever it is. But at the same time, we’re going to practice social distancing. We’re going to be washing hands. We’re going to be doing a lot of the things that we’ve learned to do over the last period of time and we have to get our country back. People are dying the other way too. When you look at what’s happened with drugs, it goes up. When you look at suicides, I mean take a look at what’s going on. People are losing their jobs. We have to bring it back and that’s what we’re doing.Donald Trump: (01:52) Yeah.Donald Trump: (02:17) Yeah. No they don’t. They have to test if they want. Some people are strong believers in testing.Donald Trump: (02:33) They should have not problem. They should have no problem. And as good as this is, we’re even getting better. We came up, don’t forget the cupboard was bare. The other administration, the last administration left us nothing. We didn’t have ventilators. We didn’t have medical equipment. We didn’t have testing. The tests were broken. You saw that. We had broken tests. They left us nothing and we’ve taken it and we have built an incredible stockpile, a stockpile like we’ve never had before.Donald Trump: (03:10) Well, I’ll be honest, I have a lot of things going on. We had a lot of people that refuse to allow the country to be successful. They wasted a lot of time on Russia, Russia, Russia. That turned out to be a total hoax. Then they did Ukraine, Ukraine, and that was a total hoax. Then they impeached the president of the United States for absolutely no reason and we even had 197 to nothing vote by the Republicans.Donald Trump: (03:44) Sure.Donald Trump: (04:04) No, I don’t know yet. I’d have to see this full statement. Look, we’ve gotten along very well. Don’t forget Governor Cuomo last week said, the president and the federal government have done a phenomenal job. He said that, a phenomenal job.Donald Trump: (04:21) David, I can only tell you what he said last week. Our country has to go back to being our country again. You have people that are not going to stand for this and I understand them very well and we are going to put out little embers and little fires and maybe some big fires, but we still have to go back to work.Donald Trump: (05:10) A couple of things. First of all, these models have been so wrong from day one, both on the low side and the upside. They’ve been so wrong. They’ve been so out of whack and they keep making new models, new models and they’re wrong. Those models that you’re mentioning are talking about without mitigation. Well, we’re mitigating and we’ve learned to mitigate, but we can be in place, work in place, and also mitigate. We’ve done it right, but now we have to get back to work. We have to do it.Donald Trump: (05:43) They have. They have.Donald Trump: (06:01) Well, the upper number was, as you know, 2.2 million people. And then there were some models or charts that showed higher than that. But 2.2 million people, I always felt 60, 65, 70, as horrible as that is. I mean, you’re talking about filling up Yankee Stadium with death. So I thought it was horrible, but it’s probably going to be somewhat higher than that. There’ll be more death, but the virus will pass with or without a vaccine and I think we’re doing very well in vaccines. But with or without a vaccine, it’s going to pass and we’re going to be back to normal, but it’s been a rough process.Donald Trump: (06:38) There’s no question about it.Donald Trump: (06:45) Yeah. You can never be convinced. When you say, am I convinced, I can say this. We’re doing really great, Oxford, Johnson and Johnson, these companies and I get reports every single day. They’re doing really great. Am I convinced? I can’t be convinced of anything, but I think that we have a really good shot of having something very, very substantial.Donald Trump: (07:30) Well, that is what it is and it’s very interesting. Even the Democrats aren’t blaming me for that. We had to closed it up and we saved millions of lives and we did the right thing. Now we’re getting back to work. The third quarter, I think, is going to be, I call it a transition quarter. A lot of people, you see it. I’ll tell you what. I got on the plane today. There was such spirit. People are starting to feel. We land in Arizona. I leave from DC. I get calls from everybody all over the country. I just spoke to the governor of Florida. Florida is really active.Donald Trump: (08:16) Well, we’ve done a lot for that. We’ve done our small business, as you know, or PPP paycheck, if you want to call it that, where small businesses are given billions of dollars so that they can take care of their employees. We’ve done a lot of other, look, we, we’ve done $2 trillion and it’s actually close to three if you really add it up, but $2 trillion has been approved and we’ll probably do more. It’s a stimulus. It’s to keep people employed, to keep small businesses open.Donald Trump: (09:23) Let me, I said, even you would say, worse than that. I said one person one time and it’s true. There was a time when we had one person in this country. We knew about it, we worked on it, but we had one person. It mushroomed to 15 people, mushroom. Other people were coming in also from Europe. Don’t forget.Donald Trump: (09:44) But don’t forget, in January. Okay, let’s talk about cases. You know why you’re at a million cases? Because we have more testing than anybody else. If we tested as much as these countries down here, okay, who don’t do very much testing at all. Look at Japan, very little testing there at the bottom of the rung. Look at South Korea gets so much publicity. The president of South Korea is a friend of mine, President Moon. He called up. He said, what you’re doing with testing is amazing. If I tested this number of people instead of this number of people, I’d have far fewer.Donald Trump: (10:15) See, this line goes all the way up over seven million tests. If I tested down here at one million tests, I would have a lot fewer cases too.Donald Trump: (10:28) But look at your question.Donald Trump: (10:39) Look, let me tell you this. I closed the border if you want to use that term. I banned people from coming into China. There were approximately 40,000 Americans. If you were in my position, you would let them come in. You could ask Ron DeSantis, great governor of Florida. Those people went through quarantine. They went through tests. They went through everything, but they were American citizens. I had to let them come back in. What I came in and what I did is I said against many people, including Anthony Fauci, who I like very much, including Deborah, who I liked very much, the doctors and many other people, they said, don’t ban China.Donald Trump: (11:22) It’s going to blow over, and they said this at the end of February. Now at the same time, I want to be optimistic. I don’t want to be Mr. Gloom and Doom. It’s a very bad subject. I’m not looking to tell the American people when nobody really knows what’s happening yet, this is going to be so tragic. I want to be aside from everything else and I’m going to use a term and some people love it and some people hate it, but I love it. I want to be a cheerleader for our country.